WAY OF THE

TURTLE
CURTIS M. FAITH

McGraw-Hill
New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
Milan New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto

Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of
America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval
system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
0-07-150946-1
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-148664-X.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the
benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such
designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales
promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George
Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted
under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon,
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use;
any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you
fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO
GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR
COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors
do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or
that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be
liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or
for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be
liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from
the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such
damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim
or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/007148664X

To
Richard Dennis, who made it all possible,
and to
Juliet Mantiply, my ﬁrst muse;
may our paths cross again some day.

This page intentionally left blank

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

lthough I have learned from almost everyone I have interacted
with over the years, there are a few people I want to thank especially for their contributions to Way of the Turtle.
First and foremost, I am greatly indebted to Richard Dennis, who
had the balls to propose and execute the Turtle idea. I am also grateful for his conﬁdence in me and my abilities when I was only 19 years
of age. Richard is one of the modern era’s truly great traders. He is also
one of the most courageous. He is a thoughtful, honest, and genuine
person. I am honored to have learned from him.
Second, I want to thank Rotchy Barker, who was my ﬁrst trading
mentor. He took me into his home and taught me for no other reason
than that he believed in me. Rotchy is the genuine article: a very generous and honest man and an excellent trader. I learned much of value
from Rotchy, not the least of which is that all successful people owe
their success to the help of others. I hope my own life honors that spirit.
Third, I want to thank George Arndt for having the crazy notion that
17-year-old kids could program computers long before that was a wellknown idea. But most of all, he gets credit for instilling in me his passion for trading and for persuading me to apply for the position with
Richard Dennis.

A

• v •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

vi • Acknowledgments

These three men helped set me down the path that became the Turtle legend and provided the basis for this book. Many others have
helped me in the writing of this book.
Dalia Al-Othman, my dulce de leche and dear friend, helped me
get my prose in decent shape for submission to my editor. She was also
there helping me along and encouraging me whenever I was discouraged. Thank you, Dalia.
Jeanne Glasser, my editor, was terriﬁc fun to work with. She is largely
responsible for the readability of this manuscript. The story ﬂows and
the words come together because of Jeanne. The book would not have
been ﬁnished without her persistent guidance and nudging. Thank
you, Jeanne.
Tim Arnold is my longtime friend and business associate; and the
guy who now runs Trading Blox, LLC, the trading software company
I founded a few years back. Writing this book has taken away from the
time I normally would have committed to that business. Tim patiently
ﬁlled in the gaps I created by being dedicated to writing this book over
the last six months. Without Tim’s help it would have been impossible
to write it. Thank you, Tim.
There are few people in the world who do as much thinking about
trading and as much sharing of their knowledge as Mark Johnson, who
runs MGJ Capital Management, LLC. Mark has contributed an amazing number of postings to online discussion groups and forums over
the last several years that have made me think. Many of the changes in
my own thinking started with a seed planted by Mark, a seed that made
me challenge what I had been doing. Mark ﬁrst gave me the idea
behind RAR% and much of what became R-cubed. Mark created the
basis for the ATR channel breakout system when he published his
PGO system a few years back. Mark also spent time reviewing this manuscript and gave me important and detailed feedback, including point-

Acknowledgments • vii

ing out assumptions I had made that might not be obvious to new readers. The book is much better because of his suggestions. Thank you,
Mark.
Tom Rollinger came to me several years back and asked me to teach
him how to trade. I was impressed with his single-minded pursuit of
the goal of being a great trader. His determination was the impetus that
got me to return to trading after a 15-year hiatus. I would not be writing this book had he not come to me. Thank you, Tom.
I would also like to thank everyone who took the time to read early
copies of the manuscript and give me honest feedback: Brett Steenbarger,
a trader and author who runs a trading blog at http://traderfeed
.blogspot.com; Mike Taylor, who runs the blog at http://taylortree.com;
David Bromley, who runs the trading education company Modus Trading (http://www.modustrading.com); John Knott; Anthony Garner; and
Jennifer Scoﬁeld.
Finally, I want to thank Van Tharp and Melita Hunt for recommending me to McGraw-Hill as a potential new author. And Van for
taking the time out of his very busy schedule to read my book on short
notice, for his candid feedback, and for writing a very nice foreword.
This means a lot to me. Thank you, Van and Melita.

This page intentionally left blank

For more information about this title, click here

CONTENTS

Acknowledgments v
Foreword xi
Preface xvii
Introduction xix

one Risk Junkies 1
two Taming the Turtle Mind 13
three The First $2 Million is the Toughest 29
four Think Like a Turtle 47
five Trading with an Edge 63
six Falling Off the Edge 75
seven By What Measure? 85
eight Risk and Money Management 109
nine Turtle-Style Building Blocks 123
ten Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step 131
eleven Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests 151
twelve On Solid Ground 179
thirteen Bulletproof Systems 207
fourteen Mastering Your Demons 223
• ix •

x • Contents

Epilogue 235

bonus chapter Original Turtle Trading Rules 245
Bibliography 275
Index 279

FOREWORD

had just ﬁnished writing the second edition of my book Trade Your
Way to Financial Freedom when my editor asked me who I’d recommend as a new author for McGraw-Hill. The ﬁrst person who
popped into my mind was Curtis Faith. Curtis had been the most successful of the Turtles.
After the initial training period, Curtis was the only trader who had
totally captured the biggest trend during that time period. He traded
the largest account for Richard Dennis, making over $31 million for
Dennis while he was a Turtle, reported Stanley Angrist in the Wall
Street Journal. Also, Curtis, much like me, has followed a road less traveled since he ended his Turtle career, and that path suggests that he is
in tune with himself instead of with Main Street or Wall Street.
Who better to write a book for McGraw-Hill than someone like that?
I didn’t think anything more about it until I was asked to supply a quote
about a new book called Way of the Turtle. Lo and behold, it was
Curtis’s book. I read about seventy pages of the unedited galleys and
immediately decided that the book needed a foreword and that I really
wanted to write it. Why? In my opinion, this is one of the ﬁve best trading books ever written, and I will recommend that all my clients become
familiar with its contents.

I

• xi •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

xii • Foreword

I almost became one of the ﬁrst Turtles, and so I have always followed the success of the Turtles with particular interest. In September
1983 I began my business of coaching traders. It was a part-time
endeavor since I still was working as a research psychologist. Nevertheless, by 1983 I considered myself a pretty good trading coach. I had
developed a test for determining a person’s trading ability that was a
good predictor of success; I called it the Investment Psychology Inventory. Lots of traders had taken it, saying that they agreed with my assessment of their strengths and weaknesses.
It was at about that time that I saw a full-page ad from Richard
Dennis in a major newspaper. He was going to select ten or so traders,
train them in his methods, and then give each of them a million
dollars of his money to trade. The offer was so good that I expected
that thousands of people would apply. As a result, I thought it was a
great opportunity for me to help them with the Investment Psychology
Inventory. They’d be screening thousands of people, and I could help.
As a result, I contacted the ofﬁces at C&D Commodities in Chicago
and sent them a copy of the test. Both Dale Dellutri (C&D’s business
manager) and Richard Dennis took the tests, but that was as far as it got.
However, they sent me a copy of their screening test, which consisted of sixty-three true/false questions and eleven short answer questions. The questions were somewhat like the following:
T/F The majority of traders are always wrong. (The word always
makes that one tough to answer.)
Name a risky thing you have done and why.
I was curious about the test and sent it in with my answers. To my
surprise, I got an invitation to interview for a Turtle position in
Chicago, where I was asked many questions, such as, “If markets are

Foreword • xiii

random, how can anyone make money trading?” I’m not sure how I
answered that one, but it probably wasn’t the way I would answer it
now. I was told that ten people would be selected from the forty applicants to train under Richard Dennis and Bill Eckhardt. We then would
sign a contract for ﬁve years that could be terminated at any time for
lack of performance.
I was not selected to be among the ﬁnal ten, and I can understand
why. I was terribly conﬂicted over the position. I had gotten involved
only because I wanted to help C&D Commodities with the testing. I
lived in southern California, and the last thing I wanted to do was move
to Chicago for ﬁve years. I was sure I would have to leave my wife and
son in California if I did that, although that’s just speculation. I loved
what I was doing—developing a new business as a trading coach—and
although becoming a Turtle might have been very valuable in launching that career, I didn’t want to give up my coaching. Lastly, I didn’t
want to go to Chicago for the last two weeks of the year (Christmas and
New Year’s) for the training. I think that conﬂict showed up pretty
clearly in the interview, and I was not selected.
Nevertheless, I had some regret at not being selected, especially
when I learned of the success of the Turtles. As a result, I’ve always
been fascinated to know what they learned. Over the years, I’ve talked
extensively with several of them and learned the essence of how they
traded. I teach a more general form of their position sizing algorithm
in my systems class and in my book The Deﬁnitive Guide to Expectancy
and Position Sizing. I’ve never thought that the systems they used are
anything special. In my opinion, their success was due entirely to their
psychology and their position sizing. The Turtles were held to secrecy
for a period of ten years, and that kind of veil makes the mystery of what
they did even more intriguing. Most people believe that they must have
had some magic secret and that no one is going to reveal it, ever.

xiv • Foreword

Why do I believe that Way of the Turtles is one of the ﬁve best trading books ever written?
First, it paints a very clear picture of what is necessary for trading
success. Curtis says in very concise terms that it’s not about the trading
system; it’s about the trader’s ability to execute the trading system. Curtis earned $78,000 in the initial training period, which was almost three
times as much as the others earned, yet they all had been taught to do
the same thing. Why had ten people who all were taught a certain set
of rules, including ﬁxed position sizing rules, produced different
results? Curtis said that some of the other Turtles thought that Richard
had given him special information, but Curtis and I know that the
answer is that trading psychology produced the difference in the results.
When I was trained in psychology in the late 1960s, the emphasis
was on behaviorism. The psychology curriculum was designed to
develop rules to answer the question: If you stimulate someone in a particular way, how will that person respond? In my opinion, that
approach was rubbish, and I was delighted when researchers started to
study the psychology of risk. The eventual conclusion of that research
is that human beings take many shortcuts in their decision making and
that makes them very inefﬁcient decision makers. Since that time, an
entire ﬁeld of behavioral economics has developed out of that research.
The second truly fascinating aspect of Way of the Turtle is that it
probably has the most lucid description of how some of the principles
of behavioral ﬁnance apply to and inﬂuence trading that I’ve ever read.
Curtis even goes into a lengthy discussion of support and resistance
and why they exist because of inefﬁciencies in our decision making. It
is must-read material.
The third aspect of Way of the Turtle that I really like is its emphasis on game theory and the way it uses game theory to explain how a
trader should think. For example, the idea is to concentrate on present

Foreword • xv

trading, forgetting the past and the future. Why? Because you know
from your historical testing that you probably will be wrong most of the
time but that your gains will be much larger than your losses. This will
result in a positive expectation. Curtis tells the readers why they must
understand and have conﬁdence in the expectation of their systems.
It’s that conﬁdence that will make them long-term winners.
Other excellent topics include:
• How the Turtles were trained and what they actually learned.
• The real “secrets” of the Turtles (I’ve already given you lots of clues).
• An excellent discussion of the problems involved with system
development and why people make mistakes in system
development because they don’t understand the basic statistical
principles involved in sampling theory.
• A superb discussion of why most systems fail to perform
adequately. Even though most good systems are dropped for
psychological reasons, there are many bad systems out there that
look good at ﬁrst glance. If you want to know why they look
good and how to spot them, you must read this book.
• Finally, there is an interesting discussion of robust measures of
systems. If you understand this material, you will have gone a
long way toward being able to design a proﬁtable long-term
system for yourself that will work.
Put all of this together with a number of stories about Curtis’s experiences as a Turtle, plus his amazing ability to synthesize his experiences as a trader and get to the essence of what is important, and you
have a book that is a must-read for all traders or anyone who has considered putting his or her money into the markets.

xvi • Foreword

The Turtle program began as a bet between Richard Dennis and Bill
Eckhardt over whether trading can be taught. Richard was willing to
stake his own money on the idea that trading can be taught. In Way of
the Turtle, Curtis gives his opinion about the outcome of that bet (it
might not be what you think), but when you read his opinion, I’d like
you to think about one more thing: Forty people were interviewed from
over a thousand applicants, and only a portion of those forty were
selected. Combine that with what Curtis says about sampling and I
think you have the real answer to the question of whether anyone can
learn to trade.
Van K. Tharp, Ph.D.
Trading Coach
President, The Van Tharp Institute

P R E FA C E

little more than 20 years ago, I was part of a grand experiment
that has become legendary among traders and investors. Known
simply as the Turtles, the experiment started as a bet between two
famous traders who were also friends: Richard Dennis and William
Eckhardt.
This is my story of that time and what I have learned since then. I
hope that eventually one of the other Turtles will write a more comprehensive account of that period. This is not that kind of book. At age
19, I was too much of an outsider to be in a position now to discuss our
collective experience. I was also too young to appreciate much of the
social interaction that occurred within the group as we worked together
and competed for survival as Turtles.
What follows is a portrayal of what I experienced and learned as a
Turtle. Way of the Turtle lays bare the entire experiment, explaining
exactly what we were taught and how we traded. The book details some
of our biggest trades and the rules behind their timing, delivering
insights into what it takes to make millions in the markets. For me, Way
of the Turtle is a story of trading and of life, speciﬁcally, how looking at
life the way a great trader does can bring you more joy, a greater range
of experience, and far less regret.

A

• xvii •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

xviii • Preface

The chapters that follow will examine this perspective as well as the
following topics:
• How the Turtles made money: What it was at the core of the
Turtle trading approach that allowed me to earn more than 100
percent returns for the four-plus years of the Turtle program
• Why some Turtles made more money than others: How the
approach allowed some to be successful while others with the
exact same knowledge lost money
• How the Turtle Way applies to stocks and Forex: How to look
beyond the rules as we implemented them to ﬁnd core
strategies that work for any tradable market
• How you can apply the Turtle Way to your own trades and in
your own life

INTRODUCTION

The Day I Met the Prince of the Pits
n your lifetime you can expect to experience only a handful of deﬁning moments. I had two in one day at the age of 19: seeing the Art
Deco building that is home to the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
for the ﬁrst time and meeting Richard Dennis, the legendary commodities trader.
The CBOT is the most famous vista in Chicago. From even a mile
away, you can see the building at 141 West Jackson Boulevard crowned
by a lone statue of Ceres, the Roman goddess of agriculture. At fortyﬁve stories high, framed by other skyscrapers, the building stands tall
among its brethren and is a ﬁtting home for the Exchange. Inside are
the pits where traders stand shoulder to shoulder buying and selling
millions of dollars’ worth of grains, meats, and currencies every few seconds amid shouts and elaborate signaling. Organized pandemonium
of this sort leaves the thousands of outsiders who visit the pits every year
in awe. For traders, it is Mecca.
As I stepped into the elevator at 141 Jackson, my palms began to
sweat. I was 19 years old and about to have an interview with Richard

I

• xix •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

xx • Introduction

Dennis, one of the world’s most famous commodities speculators. Even
before the Turtle experiment became widely known, Dennis had
earned a place in trading lore. He was branded the Prince of the Pits;
that moniker acknowledged his feat in turning a few thousand dollars
into several hundred million by his mid-thirties.
I later learned how lucky I was to be on that elevator. Over 1,000
people had applied for the position for which I was interviewing, and
only 40 applicants had been granted an audience with Dennis. Only
13—less than 1 in 100—ultimately were chosen, with another 10
selected for a follow-on program the next year.
Long before Donald Trump’s The Apprentice and other reality television contests aired, Dennis created his own competition, prompted by
a debate between him and his good friend—and an equally successful
trader—William (Bill) Eckhardt about whether great traders are made
or born. Dennis believed he could transform almost anyone into a winning trader; Eckhardt believed it was a matter of nature, not nurture.
Dennis put his money where his mouth was, and the two made a wager.
To settle the bet, they took out large ads in the Wall Street Journal,
Barron’s, and the New York Times announcing that Dennis was accepting applications from people interested in becoming his trainees. The
ad further stated that he would teach this group his trading methods
and give each trainee a million-dollar trading account.
At the time, I didn’t understand the signiﬁcance of the ad. In placing
it and proceeding with the bet, Dennis had made a bold statement. He
believed that he understood the reasons for his own success so well that
he could teach others to trade just as well—even if they were total
strangers who never had traded before. He was so conﬁdent in that assertion that he was willing to risk millions of his own cash to prove it.
Dennis’s trainees—of whom I was one—came to be known as the
Turtles after their success became a trading legend. Over four and a

Introduction • xxi

half years the Turtles earned an average return of over 80 percent per
year. But why the name Turtles? That name comes from the place
where Dennis and Eckhardt stood when the long-running debate
turned serious: a turtle farm in Singapore. Seeing the turtle farm up
close, Dennis reportedly blurted out, “We’re going to raise traders like
they raise turtles in Singapore.”
So there I was, age 19, palms sweating, on the verge of meeting the
Prince of the Pits. Walking down the hallway, I shouldn’t have been
surprised by the utilitarian look of the ofﬁces. There was no grand
entrance, no fancy lobby, no attempt to impress clients, brokers, or any
other kind of bigwig. Dennis was known for not wasting money on
showy display, and so the frugal surroundings made sense; even so, I
expected more. Everything seemed smaller than I had envisioned.
I found the door with the nameplate “C & D Commodities” and
opened it.

Dale Deluttri, Dennis’s business manager, greeted me at the door and
told me that Richard was ﬁnishing another interview. I already knew
what Richard looked like, having seen his photo in a few articles, but
I did not have a clear insight into his personality, and so I passed the
time worrying about that.
In preparation for the interview I had read everything I could ﬁnd
on or about Richard, and so I did have a few clues about his personality but not as much as I wanted. I also had taken Richard’s 40-question
test (that was part of the application), and so I knew something about
what he considered important in a trader.
When the door to Richard’s ofﬁce opened, the previous candidate
exited, told me a bit about his interview, and wished me luck. He must
have done well; I saw him a few weeks later at the ﬁrst training class. I

xxii • Introduction

walked in and met Richard and his partner, William Eckhardt—Rich
and Bill as we would later call them and as I still think of them. Rich
was a mountain of a guy with a friendly face and a quiet manner. Bill
was thin and of average height. He looked and dressed like a professor
of applied mathematics at the University of Chicago.
The interview paralleled the written test that I had received from
Rich’s C&D Commodities as part of the application process. Rich was
interested in my theory of the markets and why I thought money could
be made by trading. They were both very interested in the speciﬁcs of
my background. Looking back on it now, I was an aberration. Even
today very few people have the speciﬁc experience I had at 19 years of
age, at least as it related to the trading methods we were later taught.
In the fall of 1983 few people had personal computers; in fact, PCs
had just been invented. Yet for the previous two years I had been programming the Apple II computer as a part-time job after school. I programmed the computer to analyze what were then known as systems:
trading strategies with speciﬁc rules that deﬁned exactly when to buy
and sell stocks or commodities on the basis of their price movement.
During those two years I had written 30 or 40 different programs that
tested trading systems through the use of historical data to determine
how much money would have been made if those systems had been
used in various markets. I later realized that this was cutting-edge
research in 1983.
What had begun as an interesting after-school job evolved into a passion. I was working for a company called Harvard Investment Service
that was located in the kitchen of a small house in the town of Harvard,
Massachusetts, about 40 miles west of Boston. Harvard is the quintessential New England small town: apple orchards, a small library, a town
hall, and the town square. Harvard Investment Service consisted of just
three people: George Arndt (who owned the kitchen and the company

Introduction • xxiii

and told us what to do), my friend Tim Arnold, and me. Tim and I did
the grunt work.
George had been the ﬁrst one to interest me in trading. He had lent
me his personal copy of Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, Edwin
Lefèvre’s ﬁctional biography of the famous speculator Jesse Livermore.
I’m not sure whether it was Lefèvre’s ﬁne storytelling or Livermore’s
larger-than-life character, but after reading that book I was hooked. I
wanted to be a trader. I also believed that I could be a great trader, that
I would be a great trader. I carried that conﬁdence into the interview
with Rich and Bill as only a 19-year old could.
Analyzing trading systems turned out to be excellent preparatory work
for both the interview and the training sessions that would follow. I believe
that background was one of the reasons why I took to Rich and Bill’s methods faster and more conﬁdently than the other trainees and ultimately was
able to make more money for Rich than any of the other Turtles. From
the very start, I had more conﬁdence in both their approach and the concept of trading systematically than did any of the others.
That conﬁdence played an important role in Rich’s faith in my eventual success as well as in my ability to reach my trading potential. My
background enabled me to do what none of the other Turtles could:
follow the simple rules outlined in our two-week training class. The
fact that none of the other Turtles followed those rules that ﬁrst month
may seem strange, but I’ll save that story for later.

I was concerned at ﬁrst that I might be at a disadvantage because I had
not actually traded before. I believed my system-testing background might
provide enough of an edge to counteract that, but my lack of experience
was a primary concern. It was clear from the questions Rich and Bill
asked that the candidates were being interviewed to assess our raw intel-

xxiv • Introduction

lect and reasoning abilities. That did not surprise me, since one of the
questions on the preinterview questionnaire had been about our SAT
scores, and there had been many other questions that sought to assess our
mental capacity. What did surprise me was that they were as interested
in what I did not believe as in what I did believe as it related to trading.
I remember the actual moment during the interview when I became
convinced that I was going to get an offer. We were discussing my disbelief at how many people were sure that there was some secret philosopher’s stone that would allow one to predict the markets with uncanny
accuracy. I thought that there were far too many variables involved in
something as complex as the price of wheat or gold for any kind of real
prediction and that the people looking for the philosopher’s stone were
going to be disappointed.
As an example, I recounted a story George had told me about a glass
disk with many curved and straight lines on it that one could lay on a
chart so that the top and bottom of the price chart would magically hit
the lines as if the markets were responding to some secret order. They
seemed to respond well to the story, and at that point I thought, “I’m
going to get the position.”
I was right—about a few things. I did get the spot, and Rich and Bill
were testing for intelligence and aptitude. They wanted people who
shared the traits they believed were necessary for proﬁtable trading.
They were also being good scientists, experimenting by intentionally
building diversity into what would become known as the Turtle Class.
Members of the ﬁrst class included, among others, the following:
• A man who had a strong interest in gaming and games in
general. He also happened to be the editor of the Dungeon
Master’s Manual for the role-playing game Dungeons and
Dragons, which was all the rage in the early 1980s.

Introduction • xxv

• A man with a Ph.D. in linguistics from the University of
Chicago.
• A man who traded grains for Cargill and had been the
Massachusetts state chess champion while in school.
• A few people with trading backgrounds.
• An accountant.
• A professional blackjack and backgammon player.
Many of these individuals were among the brightest I had ever met.
Rich and Bill deﬁnitely had been screening for high intelligence,
with a particular emphasis on mathematical and analytical abilities.
Rich subsequently said in an interview that they were looking for
“extreme intelligence,” since they had so many applicants and could
afford to be picky. This characteristic described many, but not all, of
the Turtles. Surprisingly, I don’t think that our intelligence necessarily correlated with our eventual success or failure. Another common thread was a background in gaming theory and strategy, and a
good knowledge of probability mathematics as it related to games of
chance. It soon would become clear why they considered this experience relevant.

A few weeks after my interview, I received a phone call from Rich
telling me that I had been accepted into the training program. I must
not have appeared very excited because he later told me that I was the
only one of the accepted trainees who did not seem overwhelmed by
the news. He wasn’t even sure that I would show up for the class.
Rich told me that the training would be held during the last two
weeks of the year and that after this two-week session, we would begin

xxvi • Introduction

trading a small account. He also said that if we did well for an initial
trial period with that small account, he would give us each a $1 million trading account.
It may surprise some people that Rich thought he could teach a
group of traders in only two weeks. What surprises me now is that he
thought it would take that long. In fact, in the second year Rich and
Bill hired a new crop of Turtles and trained them in only one week.
The difﬁculty in trading lies not in the concepts but in the application.
It is relatively easy to learn what to do when trading. It is very difﬁcult
to apply those lessons in actual trading.
At the end of the trial trading period, which lasted one month, Rich
evaluated our performance. Some Turtles received the full $1 million
to trade, others were given smaller accounts, and still others were told
to keep trading with the original account size. Rich gave me a $2 million account, and for the duration of the Turtle program I continued
to trade the largest account for him.
In this book I will give you some of the reasons why after only one
month Rich was able to assess our relative abilities, what it was he was
looking for; and why he gave me a much larger account than he gave
the other Turtles. Rich found this ability early on in me and eventually in many of the others; it’s what I call the Way of the Turtle.
Before we get into the speciﬁcs of the Turtle Way, let me put things
in context by discussing trading in general terms; and provide some
insight on the psychological reasons why the Turtles were so proﬁtable
and why good traders are able to make money. The next two chapters
provide a foundation for Chapter Three where we will return to the
Turtle story and then dive into the details of the Turtle Way.

one
RISK JUNKIES
High risk, high reward: It takes balls of steel to play this game.
—Told to a friend before starting the Turtle program

eople often wonder what it is that makes someone a trader
rather than an investor. The distinction is often unclear
because the actions of many people who call themselves investors
are actually those of traders.
Investors are people who buy things for the long haul with the
idea that over a considerable period—many years—their investments will appreciate in value. They buy things: actual stuff. Warren Buffett is an investor. He buys companies. He doesn’t buy stock.
He buys what the stock represents: the company itself, with its management team, products, and market presence. He doesn’t care that
the stock market may not reﬂect the “correct” price for his companies. In fact, he relies on that to make his money. He buys companies when they are worth much more to him than the price at which
the stock market values them and sells companies when they are
worth much less to him than the price at which the stock market
values them. He makes a lot of money doing this because he’s very
good at it.

P

• 1 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

2 • Way of the Turtle

Traders do not buy physical things such as companies; they do not
buy grains, gold, or silver. They buy stocks, futures contracts, and
options. They do not care much about the quality of the management team, the outlook for oil consumption in the frigid Northeast,
or global coffee production. Traders care about price; essentially they
buy and sell risk.
In his informative and engaging book Against the Gods: The
Remarkable Story of Risk, Peter Bernstein discusses how markets
developed to allow the transfer of risk from one party to another.
This is indeed the reason ﬁnancial markets were created and a
function they continue to serve.
In today’s modern markets, companies can buy forward or futures
contracts for currencies that will insulate their business from the effects
of ﬂuctuations in currency prices on their foreign suppliers. Companies also can buy contracts to protect themselves from future increases
in the price of raw materials such as oil, copper, and aluminum.
The act of buying or selling futures contracts to offset business
risks caused by price changes in raw materials or ﬂuctuations in foreign currency exchange rates is known as hedging. Proper hedging
can make an enormous difference for companies that are sensitive
to the costs of raw goods such as oil. The airline industry, for example, is very sensitive to the cost of aviation fuel, which is tied to the
price of oil. When the price of oil rises, proﬁts drop unless ticket
prices are raised. Raising ticket prices may lower sales of tickets and
thus proﬁts. Keeping ticket prices the same will lower proﬁts as
costs rise because of oil price increases.
The solution is to hedge in the oil markets. Southwest Airlines
had been doing that for years, and when oil prices rose from $25
per barrel to more than $60, its costs did not increase substantially.

Risk Junkies • 3

In fact, it was so well hedged that even years after prices started to
go up, it was getting 85 percent of its oil at $26 per barrel.
It is no coincidence that Southwest Airlines has been one of the
most proﬁtable airlines over the last several years. Southwest’s executives realized that their business was to ﬂy people from place to
place, not to worry about the price of oil. They used the ﬁnancial
markets to insulate their bottom line from the effects of oil price
ﬂuctuations. They were smart.
Who sells futures contracts to companies like Southwest that
want to hedge their business risk? Traders do.

Traders Trade Risk
Traders deal in risk. There are many types of risk, and for each type
of risk there is a corresponding type of trader. For the purposes of
this book, we divide all those smaller risk categories into two major
groups: liquidity risk and price risk.
Many traders—perhaps most of them—are very short-term operators who trade in what is known as liquidity risk. This refers to the
risk that a trader will not be able to buy or sell: There is no buyer
when you want to sell an asset or no seller when you want to buy
an asset. Most people are familiar with the term liquidity as it
applies to ﬁnance in the context of the term liquid assets. Liquid
assets are assets that can be turned into cash readily and quickly.
Cash in the bank is extremely liquid, stock in a widely traded company is relatively liquid, and a piece of land is illiquid.
Suppose that you want to buy stock XYZ and that XYZ last traded
at $28.50. If you look for a price quote for XYZ, you will see two
prices: the bid and the ask. For this example, let’s say you get a

4 • Way of the Turtle

quote on XYZ as $28.50 bid and $28.55 ask. This quote indicates
that if you wanted to buy, you would have to pay $28.55, but if you
wanted to sell, you would get only $28.50 for your XYZ stock. The
difference between these two prices is known as the spread. Traders
who trade liquidity risk often are referred to as scalpers or market
makers. They make their money off the spread.
A variant of this kind of trading is called arbitrage. This entails
trading the liquidity of one market for the liquidity of another. Arbitrage traders may buy crude oil in London and sell crude oil in New
York, or they may buy a basket of stocks and sell index futures that
represent a similar basket of stocks.
Price risk refers to the possibility that prices will move signiﬁcantly
up or down. A farmer would be concerned about rising oil prices
because the cost of fertilizer and fuel for tractors would increase. Farmers also worry that prices for their produce (wheat, corn, soybeans, etc.)
may drop so low that they will not make a proﬁt when they sell their
crops. Airline management is concerned that the cost of oil may rise
and interest rates may go up, raising airplane ﬁnancing costs.
Hedgers focus on getting rid of price risk by transferring the risk
to traders who deal in price risk. Traders who jump on price risk
are known as speculators or position traders. Speculators make
money by buying and then selling later if the price goes up or by
selling ﬁrst and then buying back later when the price goes down—
what is known as going short.

Traders, Speculators, and Scalpers—Oh, My
Markets are groups of traders that interact to buy and sell. Some of
the traders are short-term scalpers who are only trying to make the

Risk Junkies • 5

tiny spread between bid and ask over and over again; others are
speculators who are trying to proﬁt from changes in prices; yet others are companies trying to hedge their risks. Each category is rife
with experienced traders who know their jobs well, along with
novices. Let’s examine a set of trades to illustrate how different
traders operate.
ACME Corporation is trying to hedge the risk of rising costs at its
British research laboratory by buying 10 contracts of British pounds
on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). ACME is at risk
because the British pound has been rising and costs at the research
laboratory are paid in British pounds. A rise in the exchange rate
between the British pound and the dollar will increase the costs for
its research facility. Hedging that risk by purchasing 10 British pound
contracts will protect it from a rise in the exchange rate because the
proﬁts on the futures contracts will offset the increased costs that result
from the change in the exchange rate that occurs when the British
pound rises against the dollar. ACME buys the contracts for $1.8452
from a Chicago ﬂoor trader, Sam, who trades as a scalper.
The actual transaction is executed by ACME’s broker, MAN
Financial, which has employees on the ﬂoor. Some of those
employees are phone clerks at a bank of desks that surround the
trading ﬂoor, and others are traders in the British pound trading
pits who execute trades for MAN. Runners take the orders from the
phone desk to the trader in the pits, where that trader executes the
trade with Sam. For large orders or during fast markets, the trader
representing MAN on the ﬂoor may use hand signals to receive buy
and sell orders from MAN’s phone clerks.
Futures contracts are deﬁned by the exchange on which they are
traded in a document known as a contract speciﬁcation. These doc-

6 • Way of the Turtle

uments deﬁne the quantity, the type of goods, and in some cases
the quality of a particular commodity. In the past, the size of a contract was based on the quantity that would ﬁt into a single railroad
car: 5,000 bushels for grains, 112,000 pounds for sugar, 1,000 barrels for oil, and so on. For this reason, contracts sometimes are
referred to as cars.
Trading takes place in units of a single contract: You cannot buy
or sell less than one contract. The exchange’s contract speciﬁcation also deﬁnes the minimum price ﬂuctuation. This is referred
to in the industry as a tick or minimum tick.
A contract for British pounds is deﬁned by the CME to be 62,500
British pounds, and the minimum tick is a hundredth of a cent, or
$0.0001. Thus, each tick of price movement is worth $6.25. This
means that Sam stands to make $62.50 for every tick in the spread
because he sold 10 contracts. Since the spread at the time he sold
the contracts to ACME was two ticks wide at $1.8450 bid and
$1.8452 ask, Sam will try to buy 10 contracts at the other side of the
spread at $1.8450 immediately. If he buys successfully at $1.8450,
this will represent a proﬁt of two ticks, or just over $100. Sam buys
his 10 contracts from a large speculator, Mr. Ice, who is trying to
accumulate a position betting on the price going down; this is known
as a short position. Mr. Ice may hold those contracts for 10 days or
10 months, depending on how the market moves after this purchase.
So, there are three types of traders involved in this transaction:
• The hedger: ACME Corporation’s trader in the hedging
department, who wants to eliminate the price risk of
currency ﬂuctuation and hedges by offsetting that risk in the
market

Risk Junkies • 7

• The scalper: Sam, the ﬂoor trader, who trades liquidity risk
and quickly trades with the hedger, hoping to earn the
spread
• The speculator: Mr. Ice, who ultimately assumes the
original “price risk” that ACME is trying to eliminate and is
betting that the price will go down over the next few days or
weeks

Panic in the Pits
Let’s change the scenario slightly to illustrate the mechanisms
behind price movement. Imagine that before Sam is able to unload
his 10 contract short position by purchasing them back, a broker
who works for Calyon Financial starts buying up contracts at the
$1.8452 ask price. That broker purchases so many contracts that all
the ﬂoor traders start to get nervous.
Although some of the ﬂoor traders may have long positions, many
of them already may be short 10, 20, or even 100 contracts; this
means that they will lose money if the price goes up. Since Calyon
represents many large speculators and hedge funds, its buying activity is particularly worrisome. “How many more contracts is Calyon
trying to buy?” the ﬂoor scalpers ask. “Who is behind the order?” “Is
this just a small part of a much larger order?”
If you were a ﬂoor trader who already had sold 20 contracts short,
you might be getting nervous. Suppose Calyon was trying to buy
500 or 1,000 contracts. That might bring the price up as high as
$1.8460 or $1.8470. You deﬁnitely would not want to sell any more
contracts at $1.8452. You might be willing to sell some at $1.8453
or $1.8455, but maybe you would be looking to get out of your con-

8 • Way of the Turtle

tracts by buying them back at $1.8452 or perhaps even at a small
loss at $1.8453 or $1.8454 instead of the $1.8450 you originally
were looking for.
In a case like this, the bid–ask spread might widen to $1.8450
bid and $1.8455 ask. Or the bid and the ask might both move up,
reaching $1.8452 bid and $1.8455 ask, as the scalpers who had
been selling short at $1.8452 started trying to get rid of their position at the same price.
What changed? Why did the price move up? Price movement
is a function of the collective perception of buyers and sellers in a
market: those who are scalping to make a few ticks many times
each day, those who are speculating for small moves during the day,
those who are speculating for large moves over the course of weeks
or months, and those who are hedging their business risks.
When the collective perception changes, the price moves. If, for
whatever reason, sellers no longer are willing to sell at the current
price but demand a higher price and buyers are willing to pay that
higher price, the price moves up. If, for whatever reason, buyers no
longer are willing to pay the current price but only a lower price
and there are sellers who are willing to sell at that lower price, the
price goes down.
The collective perception can take on a life of its own. If
enough ﬂoor traders are caught with short positions when a large
buy order comes in, panic can ensue. A large buyer might drive
the price up sufﬁciently to trigger other buy orders that have been
placed in the markets, causing even more price movement. For
this reason, experienced scalpers will get out of their short positions quickly and scalp only on the buying side when prices start
moving up.

Risk Junkies • 9

Using the example described above, a ﬂoor trader who is not
quick enough might rapidly ﬁnd himself with a 10-, 20-, or even
50-tick loss per contract. If he holds 50 contracts with a 50-tick loss,
this represents a loss of $15,625 (50  50  $6.25), more money
than he may have made that entire week or month. At some point
the psychological pain of watching so much money disappear may
be so great that the ﬂoor scalper panics and buys at whatever price
the market offers. In a fast market this may take only 1 or 2 minutes; in a slower market it may take 10 or 15.
One can see that the experienced trader not only buys out of her
short position early, she buys a few more contracts to proﬁt further
as the price moves up. When a less experienced trader panics and
starts buying, an opportunity is presented to an experienced trader
to again sell and exit his recently acquired long position to make
another proﬁt.

Death of the Pits
When we traded as Turtles, futures contracts were bought and sold
exclusively in trading pits at the commodity exchanges, where men
fought mano a mano to execute their trades with other traders
using hand signals and shouting. To outsiders it looked like insanity
at times.
The pits are dying. Electronic exchanges are replacing them in
almost every market. Among other beneﬁts, the costs for electronic
execution are lower, the executions are quicker, and traders can
determine if they are ﬁlled in milliseconds instead of minutes. These
advantages are killing the pit traded futures. In every market where

10 • Way of the Turtle

electronic trading and pit trading coexist, the volume has moved to
the electronic markets. In fact, it is likely that before this book goes
out of print there will no longer be U.S. exchanges where futures
contracts are traded in pits.
Those of us who have been involved in trading since before the
advent of electronic exchanges are saddened by the death of the pits.
In Chicago, there are many examples of traders like Richard Dennis
who came from a working-class background and made their millions
trading in the pits. For those who are skillful, the pits are better
places to trade. In the pits you can see the psychology of the market
in the faces of the other traders. Numbers on a screen just don’t convey the same kind of information. Many traders had their start running orders into the pit from the banks of phones that surrounded
them.These jobs are disappearing.
Nevertheless, while we are saddened and nostalgic about the pits,
the new electronic markets offer some new opportunities. Execution
costs are lower, and this creates opportunities to trade using strategies that trade more frequently. Some of the electronic markets
have such large volume that it is possible to buy and sell millions of
dollars worth of futures contracts without even beginning to move
the price.
Keep in mind that when I refer to traders in this book as executing trades in pits, this may not be the way trading is currently transacted in many markets. The players and actions, however, are still
the same. The pain of a losing trade is still present whether you
trade electronically or you call a broker on the phone and the trade
is transacted in the pits. The hedgers, scalpers, and speculators are
still there, hiding behind the screen—waiting to eat you alive if you
let them.

Risk Junkies • 11

The next chapter delves into the psychological biases that create differences in outlook and behavior between an inexperienced
and probably losing trader and his more successful and experienced
counterpart. It also discusses the different types of trading styles and
market states that favor each of those styles. Later chapters show
how Rich’s training turned very inexperienced traders into profitable ones in only a few weeks time.

This page intentionally left blank

two
TAMING THE
TURTLE MIND
Human emotion is both the source of opportunity in trading
and the greatest challenge. Master it and you will succeed.
Ignore it at your peril.

o trade well you need to understand the human mind. Markets
are comprised of individuals, all with hopes, fears and foibles.
As a trader you are seeking out opportunities that arise from these
human emotions. Fortunately, some very smart people—behavioral
ﬁnance pioneers—have identiﬁed the ways that human emotion
affects one’s decision-making process. The ﬁeld of behavioral
ﬁnance—brought to popular attention in Robert Shiller’s fascinating book, now in its Second Edition, titled Irrational Exuberance
and greater details of which were published by Hersh Shefrin in his
classic Beyond Greed and Fear—helps traders and investors understand the reasons why markets operate the way they do.
Just what does make prices go up and down? (Price movements
can turn an otherwise stoic individual into a blubbering pile of
misery.) Behavioral ﬁnance is able to explain market phenomena

T

• 13 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

14 • Way of the Turtle

and price action by focusing on the cognitive and psychological
factors that affect buying and selling decisions. The approach has
shown that people are prone to making systematic errors in circumstances of uncertainty. Under duress, people make poor
assessments of risk and event probabilities. What could be more
stressful than winning or losing money? Behavioral ﬁnance has
proved that when it comes to such scenarios, people rarely make
completely rational decisions. Successful traders understand this
tendency and beneﬁt from it. They know that someone else’s
errors in judgment are opportunities, and good traders understand
how those errors manifest themselves in market price action: The
Turtles knew this.

Emotional Rescue
For many years economic and ﬁnancial theory was based on the
rational actor theory, which stated that individuals act rationally and
consider all available information in the decision-making process.
Traders have always known that this notion is pure bunk. Winning
traders make money by exploiting the consistently irrational behavior
patterns of other traders. Academic researchers have uncovered a surprisingly large amount of evidence demonstrating that most individuals do not act rationally. Dozens of categories of irrational behavior and
repeated errors in judgment have been documented in academic studies. Traders ﬁnd it very puzzling that anyone ever thought otherwise.
The Turtle Way works and continues to work because it is based
on the market movements that result from the systematic and
repeated irrationality that is embedded in every person.
How many times have you felt these emotions while trading?

Taming the Turtle Mind • 15

• Hope: I sure hope this goes up right after I buy it.
• Fear: I can’t take another loss; I’ll sit this one out.
• Greed: I’m making so much money, I’m going to double my
position.
• Despair: This trading system doesn’t work; I keep losing
money.
With the Turtle Way, market actions are identiﬁed that indicate
opportunities arising from these consistent human traits. This chapter examines speciﬁc examples of how human emotion and
irrational thinking create repetitive market patterns that signal moneymaking opportunities.
People have developed certain ways of looking at the world that
served them well in more primitive circumstances; however, when
it comes to trading, those perceptions get in the way. Scientists call
distortions in the way people perceive reality cognitive biases. Here
are some of the cognitive biases that affect trading:
• Loss aversion: The tendency for people to have a strong
preference for avoiding losses over acquiring gains
• Sunk costs effect: The tendency to treat money that already
has been committed or spent as more valuable than money
that may be spent in the future
• Disposition effect: The tendency for people to lock in gains
and ride losses
• Outcome bias: The tendency to judge a decision by its
outcome rather than by the quality of the decision at the
time it was made

16 • Way of the Turtle

• Recency bias: The tendency to weigh recent data or
experience more than earlier data or experience
• Anchoring: The tendency to rely too heavily, or anchor, on
readily available information
• Bandwagon effect: The tendency to believe things because
many other people believe them
• Belief in the law of small numbers: The tendency to draw
unjustiﬁed conclusions from too little information
Although this list is not comprehensive, it includes some of the
most powerful misperceptions that affect trading and prices. Let’s
look at each cognitive bias in greater detail.

People who are affected by loss aversion have an absolute preference
for avoiding losses rather than acquiring gains. For most people, losing $100 is not the same as not winning $100. However, from a
rational point of view the two things are the same: They both represent a net negative change of $100. Research has suggested that
losses can have as much as twice the psychological power of gains.
In terms of trading, loss aversion affects one’s ability to follow
mechanical trading systems because the losses incurred in following
a system are felt more strongly than are the potential winnings from
using that system. People feel the pain of losing much more strongly
when they follow rules than they do when they incur the same losses
from a missed opportunity or by ignoring the rules of the system. Thus,
a $10,000 loss is felt as strongly as a $20,000 missed opportunity.
In business, sunk costs are costs that already have been incurred
and cannot be recovered. For example, an investment that already

Taming the Turtle Mind • 17

has been spent on research for a new technology is a sunk cost. The
sunk cost effect is the tendency for people to consider the amount
of money that already has been spent—the sunk costs—when making decisions.
Say the ACME Company has spent $100 million developing a
particular technology for building laptop displays. Now suppose
that after spending this money it becomes obvious that an alternative technology is much better and more likely to produce the
desired results in the required time frame. A purely rational
approach would be to weigh the future costs of adopting the new
technology against the future expense of continuing to use the
developed technology and then make a decision solely on the basis
of future beneﬁts and expenditures, completely disregarding the
amount of money that already has been spent.
However, the sunk cost effect causes those who make this decision to consider the amount of money previously spent and view it
as a waste of $100 million if a different technology is used. They
may choose to continue with the original decision even if it means
spending two or three times as much in the future to build the laptop displays. The sunk cost effect leads to bad decision making that
often is heightened in group situations.
How does this phenomenon inﬂuence trading? Consider the typical new trader who initiated a trade with the expectation of winning $2,000. At the time the trade ﬁrst was entered, he decided that
he would exit the position if the price dropped to the point where
a $1,000 loss would be incurred. After a few days, the trade’s position is at a $500 loss. A few more days pass and the loss grows to
over $1,000: More than 10 percent of the trading account. The
value of that account has dropped from $10,000 to less than $9,000.

18 • Way of the Turtle

This also happens to be the point where the trader previously
decided to exit.
Consider how cognitive biases might affect the decision whether
to keep true to the prior commitment to get out at a $1,000 loss or
to keep holding the position. Loss aversion makes it extremely
painful for the trader to consider exiting the position because that
would make the loss permanent. As long as he does not exit, he
believes there is a chance that the market will come back and turn
the loss into a win. The sunk cost effect makes the decision not one
of deciding what the market is likely to do in the future but one of
ﬁnding ways to avoid wasting the $1,000 that already has been spent
on the trade. So, the new trader continues to hold the position not
because of what he believes the market is likely to do but because
he does not want to take a loss and waste that $1,000. What will he
do when the price drops even more and the loss increases to $2,000?
Rational thought dictates that he will exit. Regardless of his earlier assumption about the market, the market clearly is telling him
that he was wrong, since it is far past the point at which he originally decided to exit. Unfortunately, both biases are even stronger
at this point. The loss he wishes to avoid is now larger and even
more painful to consider. For many, this kind of behavior will continue until the trader loses all his money or ﬁnally panics and exits
with a loss of 30 to 50 percent of his account, perhaps three to ﬁve
times what he had planned.
I worked in Silicon Valley during the height of the Internet craze
and had many friends who were engineers and marketers for hightech companies. Several of them were worth millions from stock
options on companies that recently had gone public. They watched
the prices go up day after day during late 1999 and early 2000. As

Taming the Turtle Mind • 19

prices started to drop in 2000, I asked many of them when they
were going to sell their stock. The reply was inevitably something
along the lines of the following: “I’ll sell if it gets back up to $X,” a
price that was signiﬁcantly higher than the level at which the market was when I asked. Almost every single one of my friends who
was in this position watched the price of his or her stock drop to a
tenth or even a hundredth of its previous value without selling the
shares. The lower it dropped, the easier it was for them to justify
waiting. “Well I’ve already lost $2 million. What’s a few more hundred thousand?” they would say.
The disposition effect is the tendency for investors to sell shares
whose price is increasing and keep shares that have dropped in
value. Some say that this effect is related to the sunk cost effect
since both provide evidence of people not wanting to face the reality of a prior decision that has not worked out. Similarly, the tendency to lock in winning trades stems from the desire to avoid
losing the winnings. For traders who exhibit this tendency, it
becomes very difﬁcult to make up for large losses when winning
trades are prematurely cut short of their potential.
Outcome bias is the propensity to judge a decision by its outcome
rather than by the quality of the decision at the time it was made.
Much of life is uncertain. There are no right answers to many of the
questions that involve risk and uncertainty. For this reason, a person
sometimes will make a decision that he considers rational and that
appears to be correct, but as a result of unforeseen and unforeseeable
circumstances that decision will not lead to the desired outcome.
Outcome bias causes people to put too much emphasis on what
actually occurred rather than on the quality of the decision itself.
In trading, even a correct approach can result in losing trades, per-

20 • Way of the Turtle

haps a few in a row. These losses can cause traders to doubt themselves and their decision process, and they then evaluate the
approach they have been using negatively because the outcome of
that approach has been negative. The next bias makes this problem particularly acute.
Recency bias is the tendency for individuals to place greater
importance on more recent data and experience. A trade that was
made yesterday weighs more heavily than do trades from last week
or last year. Two months of losing trades can count as much as or
more than the six months of winning trades that happened previously. Thus, the outcome of a series of recent trades will cause most
traders to doubt their method and decision-making process.
Anchoring is the tendency for people to rely too heavily on readily available information when making a decision involving uncertainty. They may anchor a recent price and make decisions on the
basis of how the current price relates to that price. This is one of
the reasons my friends had such difﬁculty selling their stocks: They
were anchoring on the recent highs and comparing the current
price with those highs. After they made that comparison, the current price always looked too low.
The observation that people often believe things because many
other people believe them is known as the bandwagon effect or
the herd effect. The bandwagon effect is partially responsible for
the seemingly unstoppable increase in prices at the end of a price
bubble.
People who fall under the spell of the law of small numbers
believe that a small sample closely resembles the population from
which it is drawn. The term is taken from the statistical law of large
numbers, which shows that a large sample drawn from a popula-

Taming the Turtle Mind • 21

tion does closely resemble the population from which it is taken.
This law is the basis of all polling. A sample of 500 taken randomly
from a larger population can give very good estimations for a population of 200 million or more people.
In contrast, very small samples do not reveal much about the
underlying population. For example, if a trading strategy works
four times out of a test of six times, most people would say the strategy is a good one, whereas statistical evidence indicates that there
is not enough information to draw that conclusion with any certainty. If a mutual fund manager outperforms the indexes three
years in a row, he is considered a hero. Unfortunately, a few years
of performance says very little about what the long-term expectations might be. Belief in the law of small numbers causes people
to gain and lose too much conﬁdence too quickly. When combined with the recency effect and outcome bias, it often results in
traders abandoning valid approaches just before those approaches
start working again.
Cognitive biases have a profound effect on traders because if
a trader is not inﬂuenced by them, almost every bias creates
opportunities to make money. In the following chapters, as speciﬁc aspects of the Turtle Way are explored, you will see how
avoiding these biases can provide you with a signiﬁcant advantage in trading.

The Turtle Way
Now that we’ve discussed the mind-set of a trader, let’s look at the
many ways to make money trading. Different types of trading strategies or trading styles have their aﬁcionados. In fact, some traders

22 • Way of the Turtle

believe in their particular style with such fervor that all others are
considered inferior. I hold no such belief. Anything that works,
works. Doggedly sticking to a method to the exclusion of all others
is foolish. This section explores some of the most popular trading
styles currently in use. The ﬁrst approach I’ll discuss is known as
trend following.

Trend Following
In trend following, the trader attempts to capitalize on large price
movements over the course of several months. Trend followers
enter trades when markets are at historical highs or lows and exit
when a market reverses and sustains that movement for a few
weeks.
Traders spend a lot of time developing methods to determine
exactly when a trend has begun and when it has ended; however,
all the approaches that are effective have very similar performance
characteristics. Trend following generates excellent returns and has
done so consistently for as long as anyone has traded futures contracts, but it is not an easy strategy for most people to follow for several reasons.
First, large trends occur fairly infrequently; this means that trendfollowing strategies generally have a much higher percentage of
losing trades than winning trades. It may be typical for a trendfollowing system to have 65 or 70 percent losing trades.
Second, in addition to losing money when there are no trends,
trend-following systems lose when trends reverse. A common
expression that the Turtles and other trend followers use is “The
trend is your friend until the end when it bends.” The bends at the
end can be brutal both on your account and on your psyche.

Taming the Turtle Mind • 23

Traders refer to these losing periods as drawdowns. Drawdowns usually begin after a trendy period ends, but they can continue for
months when markets are choppy, and the trend-following strategies continue to generate losing trades.
Drawdowns generally are measured in terms of both their length
(in days or months) and their extent (usually in percentage terms).
As a general rule, one can expect drawdowns for trend-following
systems to approach the level of the returns. Thus, if a trendfollowing system is expected to generate a 30 percent annual return,
you can expect a losing period in which the account may drop 30
percent from its highs.
Third, trend following requires a relatively large amount of
money to trade using reasonable risk limits because of the large distance between the entry price and the stop loss price at which one
would exit if the trade did not work out.
Trading with a trend-following strategy with too little money
greatly increases the odds of going bust. We will examine this problem in much greater detail in Chapter 8, “Risk and Money Management.”

Countertrend Trading
A countertrend trading style makes money when markets are not
trending by using a strategy that is the opposite of trend following.
Instead of buying when markets make new highs, traders who use
countertrend strategies sell short at prices close to the same new
highs, counting on the fact that most breakouts of new highs do
not result in trends. In Chapter 6 we will look at the market
mechanisms that are the source of proﬁt for countertrend trading:
support and resistance.

24 • Way of the Turtle

Swing Trading
Swing trading is essentially the same as trend following except that
it targets shorter-term market moves. For example, a good swing
trade may last three or four days instead of several months. Swing
traders often look for patterns in price movement that indicate a
higher likelihood of a signiﬁcant short-term price movement in one
direction or another.
Swing traders tend to use shorter-term charts that show price bars
for every ﬁve minutes, ﬁfteen minutes, or every hour. On these
charts a large three- or four-day move will appear the way a threeto six-month trend does on a daily bar chart.

Day Trading
Day trading is not so much a style as it is a reference to the
extremely short-term time frames involved. A true day trader looks
to exit the market before it closes each day. This makes his or her
position less susceptible to large adverse moves spurred by news
occurring overnight. Day traders generally use one of three different trading styles: position trading, scalping, or arbitrage.
Day traders generally use a style such as trend following or countertrend trading but do it over a much shorter period. A trade may
last a few hours instead of days or months.
Scalping is a specialized form of trading that was once the
domain of only those traders on the ﬂoor of the exchange. Scalpers
are looking to make the difference between the bid and the ask,
which is known as the spread. If gold is $550 bid and $551 ask, a
scalper will be looking to buy at $550 and sell at $551. For this reason scalpers create liquidity by bidding and offering, hoping for a
balance of buy and sell orders.

Taming the Turtle Mind • 25

Arbitrage is a form of trading that capitalizes on price differences in the same market or in very similar markets. Often these
markets are traded on different exchanges. For example, an arbitrage trader may buy gold on the Comex ﬂoor at $550 and sell
ﬁve e-mini gold contracts on the CBOT’s globex exchange for
$555 to capture a very short-term price mismatch.

Watching the Market State
Each of these strategies tends to work better some of the time:
When the price movement of a market behaves in a particular way
or when that market is in a particular state.
As Figure 2-1 illustrates, speculative markets exist in one of four
states:
• Stable and quiet: Prices tend to stay within a relatively
small range with little movement up or down outside that
range.
• Stable and volatile: There are large daily or weekly changes,
but without major changes over a period of months.
• Trending and quiet: There is slow movement or drift in prices
when measured over a period of months but without severe
retracement or price movement in the opposite direction.
• Trending and volatile: There are large changes in price
accompanied by occasional signiﬁcant shorter-term reversals
of direction.
Trend followers love markets that are trending and quiet. They can
make money without having signiﬁcant adverse price movement.

26 • Way of the Turtle

The Four Market States

Figure 2-1

Stable and Quiet

Stable and Volatile

Trending and Quiet

Trending and Volatile

The Four Market States

This makes it very easy to keep a trade for a long time because the
market does not give back proﬁts during the trade. Volatile markets
are much more punishing for trend followers. It can be very difﬁcult to hold onto a trade when proﬁts are vanishing for days or
weeks at a time.
Countertrend traders love markets that are stable and volatile.
These types of markets have relatively large swings but remain in
a fairly narrow range of prices. Swing traders like volatile markets,
whether trending or not. Volatile markets present more opportunities because swing traders make money on short term price moves.
These types of moves are the characteristic that deﬁnes volatile
markets.
Although it’s sometimes easy to tell when a market is in one of
these states, both the degree of trendiness and the volatility vary over
time. This means that many times markets simultaneously display

Taming the Turtle Mind • 27

characteristics of two states, with one of the attributes shifting from
a low value to a high one or vice versa. For instance, you may have
a market that starts out trending and quiet, and then as the trend progresses, the volatility increases so that you get price movement that
changes from trending and quiet to trending and volatile.
A Turtle never tries to predict market direction but instead looks
for indications that a market is in a particular state. This is an important concept. Good traders don’t try to predict what the market will
do; instead they look at the indications of what the market is doing.

This page intentionally left blank

three
THE FIRST $2 MILLION
IS THE TOUGHEST
Trade with an edge, manage risk, be consistent, and keep it simple.
The entire Turtle training, and indeed the basis for all successful
trading, can be summed up in these four core principles.

he Turtle training sessions were held in a conference room
at the Union League Club in Chicago, two blocks east of the
CBOT. From the get-go, the experience was rife with contradiction. For instance, we were instructed to wear jackets since
the Union League Club had a dress code, but that did not mesh
with Rich’s personality. He was not the kind of guy who would
require a dress code. Also, I have no idea how we ended up in
this particular room, but one could not have chosen a more
unlikely place for our training. The Union League Club was the
quintessential gentleman’s club. Its early members included
such Chicago luminaries as Philip Danforth Armour of the meat
company; George Pullman, who created the luxury Pullman railroad car; Marshall Field; and John Deere. Picture a room ﬁlled
with cigar smoke and you’ll have a pretty good feel for the Union

T

• 29 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

30 • Way of the Turtle

League Club in 1983. It was worlds away from the subdued
ofﬁces at C&D Commodities.
Thirteen of us made up the ﬁrst Turtle class: eleven men and
two women. Many of those in attendance already had experience
trading, but several of us were complete novices. I was considerably younger than my classmates. There were a couple of trainees
who looked to be in their mid-twenties, but most were in their thirties as far as I could tell. Even though I was only 19, I felt as though
I were among a group of peers; the age and experience of the others did not intimidate me.
Before getting into the particulars of what we were taught, let
me describe a few things about myself to help you understand how
my personality and perspectives inﬂuenced what I took away from
Rich’s class. I like to simplify concepts and am adept at getting to
the core of a matter—to its essence. Throughout the sessions, I did
not need to take detailed notes on what was said; I listened for the
most important concepts: the key ideas. I paid attention to what
was being said and why it was being said. I ﬁrmly believe that my
strong performance during the ﬁrst month of trading was due to
this ability and to identifying the most important of Rich’s lessons.

Class Begins
Both Rich and Bill taught the class, and their innovative perspectives struck me from the beginning. They approached the markets
scientiﬁcally and through the use of reason, and developed a very
mature understanding of the principles behind their success. Rich
and Bill did not rely on gut feelings. Instead, they based their methods on experimentation and investigation. They did not use anec-

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 31

dotal evidence but relied on computerized analysis to determine
what worked and what did not. Their intensive scientiﬁc research
gave them a special type of conﬁdence in thinking about trading
that has been crucial to their success. (This is what had given Rich
the conﬁdence required to stake his money on being able to teach
a group of neophytes to trade in the ﬁrst place.)
Rich and Bill ﬁrst taught us the foundations of basic gaming and
probability theory. I had taken probability and statistics in high
school, so that material was not new to me. They explained to us the
mathematical basis for money management, risk of ruin, and expectation—all of which are well-known gambling concepts. Several of
the Turtles had been former professional gamblers, and so they were
already familiar with these basics. I’ll explore these theories more
thoroughly in later chapters, but here I’ll give you a brief synopsis of
what was covered in the class.

Risk of Ruin
Searching for the term risk of ruin on the Internet will yield many
references to gambling and blackjack because the concept is much
more popular in gambling than in trading. However, risk of ruin is
a trader’s primary consideration in deciding how many contracts of
a particular market or shares of a particular stock to trade at any
speciﬁc time.
In gambling, risk of ruin refers to the possibility that you will
drop all your money because of a string of losses. For example,
suppose we were rolling dice and I said I would give you $2 for
every $1 you bet if a roll of a single die came up with a 4, 5, or
6. You would want to bet as much as possible, since these are

32 • Way of the Turtle

great odds. The chances that a 4, 5, or 6 will come up is 50 percent, since there are six sides, and three of those sides will pay 2
to 1. The odds indicate that if you rolled four times, you most
likely would get two losses and two wins. If you bet $100 each
time, you’d lose twice and win twice for a net gain of $200 for
the four rolls.
What size bet would you make if you had only $1,000 in your
pocket: $1,000? $500? $100? The problem is that even though the
game is in your favor, you still have a chance of losing. If you bet too
big and lose too many times in a row, you could lose all your money
and forfeit the ability to keep playing through pure chance. If you
bet $500 and lose twice in a row, you’ll be out of money. There is a
25 percent chance of losing twice in a row on the ﬁrst two rolls; so
with a $500 bet, your risk of ruin is 25 percent with just two rolls.
One of the most important aspects of risk of ruin is that it
increases disproportionately as the size of the bet rises. Doubling
the amount risked per trade typically will not just double the risk
of ruin; depending on the particulars of the system, it might triple,
quadruple, or even quintuple it.

The Science of Controlled Risk
Money management refers to managing the size of market risk
to ensure one’s ability to keep going through the inevitable bad
periods that every trader experiences. Money management is the
science of keeping your risk of ruin at acceptable levels while
maximizing your proﬁt potential.
The Turtles used two approaches to money management. First,
we put our positions in small chunks. That way, in the event of a

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 33

losing trade we would have a loss on only a portion of a position.
Rich and Bill called those chunks units. Second, we used an innovative method they devised for determining the position size for
each market. The method is based on the daily movement of the
market either upward or downward in constant dollar terms. They
determined the number of contracts in each market that would
cause them all to move up and down by approximately the same
dollar amount. Rich and Bill called the volatility measure N,
although it now is known more commonly as average true range.
That is the name given to it by J. Welles Wilder in his book New
Concepts in Technical Trading Systems.
Since the number of contracts we traded in each market was
adjusted for the volatility measure, N, the daily ﬂuctuations for any
speciﬁc trade tended to be similar. The concept of adjusting trade
size on the basis of volatility (position size) has been written about
by others, most notably by Van Tharp in his 1998 book Trade Your
Way to Financial Freedom and the second edition of that book, published in 2007. However, in 1983 this was an extremely innovative
concept. At that time most traders adjusted their position sizes in
various markets on the basis of loose subjective criteria or the broker’s margin requirements, which were based only loosely on
volatility.

The Turtle Edge
Since several of us did not have any trading experience, signiﬁcant
time was spent on the mechanics of order entry and trading. Rich
and Bill also covered several concepts that were important even for
experienced traders to review since few in the class had traded

34 • Way of the Turtle

accounts as large as Rich proposed giving us. Trading large
accounts presents its own difﬁculties because the size of the orders
can cause the markets to move, making it more expensive to trade.
Effectively managing orders is important in minimizing this effect.
The Turtles were taught to use limit orders rather than market
orders, which we did most of the time. Large market orders invariably move the price. A limit order, sometimes known as an or better order, is one in which you buy at a speciﬁc price or better. For
example, if you want to buy gold and the price is currently at 540
and has been moving between 538 and 542 for the last 10 minutes,
you might put in an order to buy at “539 limit” or “539 or better.”
In this scenario, if you had placed a market order, it most likely
would have been ﬁlled at the higher price of 541 or 542. Over time,
even small differences in price add up to a lot of money.
Arguably the most important element of the Turtle Way and the
pivotal difference between the approach and perspective used by
winning traders and that used by losing traders is that the Turtles
were taught how to think in terms of the long run when trading and
we were given a system with an edge.
Trading methods that work over the long run have what is known
in gambling as an edge. An edge refers to one’s systematic advantage over an opponent. Most of the time casinos have the edge over
their clientele. With some games it is possible for players to gain
an edge. Skillful blackjack card counters are able to gain a temporary edge over the house when they notice that a large number of
low cards have been played. This means that there is a higher possibility that any card draw from the deck will be a high card. During these times, the players can have an advantage over the house.
They have a temporary edge. This is because the house must hit

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 35

on any combination of cards up to 16. If there are a large number
of high cards remaining in the deck, that means that there is a
higher possibility that one of these cards will cause the house to go
bust, since any combination of cards over 21 points will cause the
house to lose.
So a skillful card player plays with small bets during the majority of the time when the house has an edge. They lie in wait for
the occasion when due to random chance the player gains a temporary edge over the house. At these times the players bet with
large bets to press their advantage over the house. In practice, this
is not so easy because one sure way of getting noticed by the
house and getting kicked out of the casino is to bet minimums
and then suddenly bet maximums when the odds turn in your
favor.
This is one of the reasons that many successful gamblers operate in teams. One team member might count at the table and then
indicate to another team member when the odds had turned. That
other member would show up as a new player and then proceed
to bet from the start at a much higher level. Team members would
then pool their money at the end of the night. These methods
work because the professional gamblers have a system with an
edge.
Rich and Bill taught us expectation so we would have a ﬁrm
intellectual basis for being able to continue with our methods during the periods of losing trades which come when trading any strategy. The systems we were taught had a very signiﬁcant edge during
the markets when we traded them. Expectation was one way of
quantifying that edge. It was also an intellectual foundation for
avoiding the outcome bias.

36 • Way of the Turtle

Remember outcome bias: the tendency to judge a decision on
the basis of its outcome rather than on the quality of that decision
at the time it was made? We were trained explicitly to avoid outcome bias, to ignore the individual outcomes of particular trades
and focus on expectation instead.

Expectation: Quantifying the Edge
The term expectation is also derived from gambling theory and
answers the question “What happens if I keep doing this?” in quantiﬁable terms. Positive expectation games are those in which it is
possible to win; the blackjack example above when the player
counts cards has positive expectation. Negative expectation games
are those such as roulette and craps where the house has the advantage and so over the long run a gambler will lose. Casino owners
understand expectation very well. They know that games of chance
in which the house has a positive expectation of even just a few percentage points can provide large sums of money over the course of
multiple players and many days. Casino owners do not care about
the losses they incur because such losses only encourage their gambling clientele. For owners, losses are just the cost of doing business;
they know they will come out ahead over the long run.

The Turtle Mind
• Think in terms of the long run when trading.
• Avoid outcome bias.
• Believe in the effects of trading with positive expectation.

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 37

The Turtle Way views losses in the same manner: They are the
cost of doing business rather than an indication of a trading error
or a bad decision. To approach losses in this way, we had to know
that the method by which the losses were incurred would pay out
over the long run. The Turtles believed in the long-term success of
trading with positive expectation.
Rich and Bill might say that a particular system had an expectation of 0.2; that meant that over time you would make 20¢ for
every dollar risked on a particular trade. They determined the
expectation for trading systems by analyzing a system’s historical
trades. Expectation was based on the average dollar amount won
per trade divided by the average amount risked. That risk is determined by the difference between the entry price and the stop loss
price (the price at which we would exit in the event of a loss), multiplied by the number of contracts traded, multiplied by the size of
the contract itself.
Here’s an example that illustrates how the Turtles measured risk.
For a gold trade entered long at $350 with a stop at $320 for 10 contracts, there is a risk of the $30 difference between the entry price and
the stop loss exit price multiplied by the position size of 10 contracts,
multiplied by the size of the contract itself, which is 100 ounces. Once
those numbers are multiplied, you have a total of $3,000.
The Turtles were encouraged to look at the long-term results of
a speciﬁc approach and ignore the losses we expected to incur
while trading with that approach. In fact, we were taught that periods of losses usually precede periods of good trading. This training
was critical to both the Turtles’ potential success and their ability
to keep trading according to a speciﬁc set of rules through extended
periods of losing trades.

38 • Way of the Turtle

Trend Following
Trends are sustained changes in price that occur over a period of
weeks or months. The basic idea of trend following is to buy just
as a trend toward higher prices starts and exit just after that trend
ends. Markets have the inclination to move, or trend, in one of
three directions: up, down or sideways. The Turtles were taught to
buy just as the market moved from trending sideways to trending
up and also to sell short just as a trend down would begin, exiting
each trend after it ended, i.e. when the trend went from moving
up or down to moving sideways again.
It is funny how over the years the secret rules of the Turtles have
been discussed and some individuals have charged thousands of
dollars to teach them. The reality is that the particular rules we
used were a fairly unimportant component of our success. There
are many other widely known trend-following methods that work
equally well, and many that are arguably better. In fact, even the
method we traded with was well known at the time we used it.
The secret of trading and of the Turtles’ success is that you can
trade successfully by using ideas and concepts that are well known
and have been around for years. But you have to follow those rules
consistently.
The speciﬁc method we used was known as the breakout, sometimes referred to as Donchian channels after Richard Donchian,
who popularized the breakout method of trading. The basic idea
was to buy if a market exceeded the highest price for a particular
number of preceding days, that is, broke out of its prior price levels. We had an intermediate-length system that Rich and Bill called
System 1 that considered 20 days (or 4 trading weeks) of prices to
determine the highs and lows and a longer-term system, System 2,

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 39

that used 60-day (12-week) highs and lows to determine the breakout. We would calculate the most extreme highs and lows for each
system at the end of each day. Generally, this meant looking back
to determine one or two prices that were the high on the basis of
their visual appearance. Most days, the highs would remain the
same and there would be no work to do. Each system had two types
of exits. The ﬁrst was a stop loss exit that was a maximum of 2N, or
two average true ranges away from the entry point. This also happened to represent 2 percent of our account because the way we
determined the number of contracts to trade per market also was
based on N (average true range).
The lessons of the Turtle class can be summed up in these four
points:
1. Trade with an Edge: Find a trading strategy that will
produce positive returns over the long run because it has a
positive expectation.
2. Manage Risk: Control risk so that you can continue to trade
or you may not be around to see the beneﬁts of a positive
expectation system.
3. Be Consistent: Execute your plan consistently to achieve
the positive expectation of your system.
4. Keep It Simple: The core of our approach was simple: catch
every trend. Two or three trades might account for all your
proﬁts, so don’t miss a trend or you might kill your whole
year. This is simple and easy to understand, not easy to do.
This last point is an important one, as you will see in the following section when I discuss our actual trading. The details of our

40 • Way of the Turtle

speciﬁc approach were not as important in my mind when we
started trading as were being consistent and not missing a trend.
These simple concepts were easily missed when we started to put
real money on the line.

Things Heat Up
Our two weeks of training completed, the class was eager to begin
trading. We returned to Chicago after the New Year holiday, and
each one of us was given a desk in a large ofﬁce on the eighth ﬂoor
of the Insurance Exchange building right next to the CBOT on
Jackson.
The desks were arranged in pairs of six that had six-foot partitions between them. We each had the chance to choose a desk, and
that meant that we selected the person we would be sitting next to
for the indeﬁnite future. Each desk had a telephone with a private
line that rang directly at that desk.
The Turtles were given a sheet each week that listed the number of contracts per million in the trading account for each of the
markets we traded. However, to simplify the process for the practice trades, we were told to use a ﬁxed unit size of three contracts
for each market. We were to take a position of at most 4 units or 12
contracts for each commodity we traded. That roughly corresponded to an account size of $50,000 to $100,000.
We had full discretion over our accounts and could make any
trades we wanted as long as we stated the reasons behind a trade
and followed the general outlines of our system. We did this by
maintaining a log for the ﬁrst month that indicated the reasons
behind every trade we made. Most of my entries were of the fol-

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 41

lowing form: “Entered long at $400.00 because it was a 60-day
breakout according to the rules of System 2.”
A few days into the New Year, February heating oil rose from
about $0.80 to $0.84, and so I followed the system and bought three
contracts. The trade was immediately proﬁtable, and in just a few
days I had bought the maximum 12 contracts. Over the next several
days, our “trading room” was buzzing with orders and the euphoria
of quick proﬁts: Heating oil rose to over $0.98 in less than a week.
This was before the days when computers printed charts automatically. We followed the charts printed in Commodities Perspective, a tabloid-sized newspaper with charts for most of the actively
traded futures contracts that month. Since the charts were updated
only once per week, we needed to pencil in the prices for new days
after the close each day.
Heating oil challenged that approach because we were only two
weeks from the end of the contract expiration, and so Commodities
Perspective stopped covering the February contract. The problem
was that we had to use our old chart, which only went up to about
$0.90 since the high of the last year had been only $0.89. This
meant that the price was literally “off the charts.” To deal with this,
I cut out a section of the previous week’s charts that did not have
any prices on it and taped it to the top of the chart. The prices
extended about 12 inches past the top of the original chart.
While doing this, I noticed something that struck me as very odd;
in fact, it still does. I was the only Turtle with a full position. Every
other single Turtle had decided for some unfathomable reason not
to follow the system Rich and Bill had outlined.
I don’t know if it was fear of losing too soon after starting, the
fact that the February contract of heating oil was going to expire in

42 • Way of the Turtle

a few weeks, or simply a preference for a more conservative trading style, but I could not ﬁgure out how everyone could have
attended the same training session I did and not be completely
loaded in February heating oil. (Loaded was a expression we used
to indicate having the maximum four-unit position.)
We were told over and over not to miss a trend, and here it was only
a few weeks later and many of the Turtles had missed the boat on a
very signiﬁcant one. If we had been trading a normal $1 million
account, we would have had a unit size of 18 contracts instead of 3,
meaning that I would have made about $500,000, or 50 percent, on
this trade.
The few days that followed my noticing that I was the only one
who had the full position were volatile. Heating oil dropped in price
from a high of about $0.98 to $0.94, or about $1,200 per contract.
After the price dropped for two straight days, I noticed something
else that I found interesting.
According to Rich and Bill’s training, it was very clear that the
right thing to do during a brief drop was to hold on and let the
proﬁts run. Therefore, that is what I did: I held all 12 contracts as
the price dropped. In just a couple of days I saw my proﬁts drop
from about from $50,000 to $35,000. Upon seeing the proﬁts evaporate, the few Turtles who had signiﬁcant positions liquidated their
contracts.
Then the markets woke up. The next day the price began to rise
again. Soon it passed the previous high of $0.98 and kept rising to
over $1.05. It reached its peak a day or two before the contract was
due to expire.
I got a call from Dale in Rich’s ofﬁce informing me that Rich
did not want to take delivery of heating oil, and so I ended up get-

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 43

ting out of all 12 contracts at $1.03, which was very near the contract high of $1.053 for the February contract. The vast majority of
the time the looming expiration date for a contract did not cause
us to exit a position. Instead, we simply transferred our position into
the next liquid contract by exiting the expiring month and taking
a new position in the next month. In this case things were different; the trend had only taken place in the February 1984 contract,
so there was no reason to roll. This also meant that I needed to stay
in the February contract in order to ride the trend.
Figure 3-1 shows the February 1984 heating oil prices and the
entry and exit for our ﬁrst major trend as Turtles.

HOG: February 84 Heating Oil
1.10

1.05

Exit
1.0310
1.00

0.95

0.90

0.85

Entry
0.8451
Initial Stop
0.8377

0.80

0.75

84

83

Ja

n

19

19
D

ec

19
ov
N

O
ct

19

83

83

0.70

Enter Long
1984-01-11 Day

Figure 3-1

The Turtles’ First Trend

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Exit 13 bars
1984-01-30 Day

44 • Way of the Turtle

After the trade was over, my account was up $78,000. I was
rewarded for holding to the methods we were taught by earning
almost three times as much on this trade as any of the other Turtles
did. The few who had positions of a reasonable size had all exited
near the lows of the previous dip and ended up missing half the
move. The Turtles who had not entered the trade made nothing.
The difference in return had nothing to do with knowledge and
everything to do with emotional and psychological factors. It seemed
crazy to me. We all had been taught exactly the same thing, but my
return for January was three times that of the others in the class or
more. These were very intelligent people who had been taught by
the most famous trader of that time. Several of them would be among
the most successful traders in the world within a few years, yet they
had failed to execute the plan during the practice trading period.
Over the years I kept ﬁnding evidence that emotional and psychological strength are the most important ingredients in successful
trading. This was my ﬁrst exposure to that idea and the ﬁrst time I
had seen it in action.

The First Report Card
During the ﬁrst month of trading, Rich and Bill dropped by once
a week or every other week. After the ﬁrst month was over, they
came by and conducted an extensive Q&A session with the group.
In it, Rich asked all the Turtles why they had not bought more heating oil. Some answered that they had thought the trade was too
risky, that it had gone up too fast; others had thought the move
would not last because there were only a few days left for trading
the contract.

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 45

I had looked at things differently. At the time, I based my strategy on the belief that Rich would be evaluating us on our ability
to execute the systems we were taught. I also thought he would look
more favorably on trades faithfully executed that incurred losses
than on trades we should have taken but did not, even if that
avoided losses.
I thought the riskiest thing to do was not take the heating oil
trade. During the Q&A, Rich made it clear to everyone that taking
the trade was the correct move. The scenario could not have been
better for teaching the class a valuable lesson. Slightly more than
one month after training, we had witnessed in actual trading the
importance of not missing trends and had that lesson reinforced in
such a way that none of us would ever forget it.
Rich had told us that after the ﬁrst month that he would give
those of us who did well a $1 million account to trade. He had indicated before we actually traded that many in the class would not
get the full account and that we would get the opportunity to trade
larger only when we proved ourselves. Several in the class did
receive the $1 million account Rich promised because he had faith
in their ability to execute. Many others continued to trade the limited accounts we used in January for several more months.
I was surprised but pleased when Rich gave me a $2 million
account to trade. Evidently he liked the way I had handled the
heating oil move.

This page intentionally left blank

four
THINK LIKE A TURTLE
Good trading is not about being right, it is about trading right.
If you want to be successful, you need to think of the long run
and ignore the outcomes of individual trades.

fter witnessing the success of the Turtles, many traders and
investors have concluded that Richard Dennis won his bet
with Bill Eckhardt that trading can be taught. I don’t agree. I think
the bet was a draw.
What people do not know is that many Turtles, perhaps one-third
to one-half of them, were less proﬁtable than the highest-performing
Turtles or were not successful at all. So, although most of the Turtles learned from the experiences of that ﬁrst month and over the
months that followed developed into winning traders, others were
dropped from the program with losing records. The difference
between the best- and the worst-performing Turtles came down to
their individual psychological makeup. Some took more readily to
the Turtle Way than did others, proving that although trading can be
taught to most people, some are better suited to it than others.
An important aspect of understanding the winning trader is
understanding how his or her emotions affect trading. If you were

A

• 47 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

48 • Way of the Turtle

born with the right qualities, you will ﬁnd it easier to learn how to
trade well; if you were not, you will need to develop those qualities. That will be your primary task. What are the right qualities?

It’s Not about Who’s Right
Winning traders think in the present and avoid thinking too much
about the future. Beginners want to predict the future in their trading. When they win, they think it means they were right and they
feel like heroes. When they lose, they feel like scum. That is the
wrong approach.
Turtles do not care about being right. They care about making
money. Turtles do not pretend to be able to predict the future. They
never look at markets and say: “Gold is going up.” They look at the
future as unknowable in speciﬁcs but foreseeable in character. In
other words, it is impossible to know whether a market is going to
go up or down or whether a trend will stop now or in two months.
You do know that there will be trends and that the character of
price movement will not change because human emotion and cognition will not change.
It turns out that it is much easier to make money when you are
wrong most of the time. If your trades are losers most of the time,
that shows that you are not trying to predict the future. For this reason, you no longer care about the outcome of any particular trade
since you expect that trade to lose money. When you expect a trade
to lose money, you also realize that the outcome of a particular
trade does not indicate anything about your intelligence. Simply
put, to win you need to free yourself and your thinking of outcome
bias. It does not matter what happens with any particular trade. If

Think Like a Turtle • 49

you have 10 losing trades in a row and you are sticking to your plan,
you are trading well; you are just having a bit of bad luck.

Forget the Past
Ironically, as well as thinking too much about the future, most
traders dwell too much on the past. They worry about what they
have done, the mistakes they have made, the trades in which they
have lost money.
Turtles learn from the past but don’t worry about it. They don’t
berate themselves for mistakes they have made. They also don’t criticize themselves for trades in which they lost money; they know
that is part of the game.
Turtles view the past holistically and don’t put any particular
emphasis on recent events. The recent past is no more important
than any other historical time period; it only feels that way. Turtles
avoid recency bias. They know that most of the traders in the market exhibit this tendency, and for that reason, the market often
shows evidence of the same bias. The ability to avoid recency bias
is an important component of successful trading.
I saw the crippling effect of recency bias ﬁrsthand long after the
Turtle program had ended. Once the program had been completed, each Turtle had to wait six years before the conﬁdentiality
agreements expired and we could tell others about the methods we
used to trade. I had a couple of close friends who were interested
in learning those methods because they knew how well the system
worked for me.
In 1998 I taught one of them my methods after warning him
that consistency was the key. I told him that he had to execute all

50 • Way of the Turtle

the trades religiously or he would not be successful. So what did
he do? He became a victim of recency bias.
Around February 1999 I asked him how he was doing in cocoa
since I had noticed that there was a great downward trend. He told
me that he did not take the trade because he had lost so much trading cocoa and thought that the trade was too risky. Table 4-1 shows
the cocoa trades one would have encountered by trading breakouts
from April 1998 until the trade with the large trend occurred. Note
that there are 17 losing trades in a row in the cocoa market before
a very sizable winning trade that started in November 1998.
This is typical of what you should expect to encounter in trading.
If you consider a single market at a particular point in time, things
can look very bleak. You may go several years before ﬁnding a single
good trend in some markets. If you focus too much on the recent past,
you will be tempted to think that certain markets are not tradable.
My friend was not unique. Most traders are plagued by the
recent past. Some of the Turtles were affected by it so strongly during the program that they never traded successfully and ﬁnally were
cut. Ironically, it seems that just about the time everyone else gives
up, trends appear and tend to be easy to ride and extremely profitable. We’ll examine this phenomenon in more detail later in
Chapter 13 in our discussion of portfolio and market analysis.

Avoid the Future Tense
Earlier in the book we established how cognitive biases can torture
potentially good traders. Recency bias, the strong need to feel that
one is right, and the propensity to predict the future are to be
avoided at all costs.

Table 4-1

1998 Cocoa Breakout Trades

• 51 •

Number

Unit

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4

Entry
27 Apr
6 May
12 May
14 May
23 Jun
25 Jun
29 Jun
15 Jul
27 Jul
3 Aug
13 Aug
17 Aug
24 Aug
16-Sep
1 Oct
13 Oct
28 Oct
6 Nov
20 Nov
24 Nov
30 Nov
8 Dec
21 Dec
4 Jan
15 Jan
25 Jan
27 Jan
8 Feb

Position

Price

Quantity

Exit

%

L
LL
LL
LL
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

2,249
2,261
2,276
2,283
2,100
2,094
2,085
2,070
2,069
2,050
2,036
2,024
2,024
2,014
1,979
1,976
1,967
1,961
1,918
1,903
1,892
1,873
1,824
1,808
1,798
1,748
1,742
1,738

6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
5
5
6
6
6
5
5
5
5
5
6
6
5
5
5
5
4
4
4
7

2,234
2,246
2,261
2,268
2,114
2,108
2,099
2,084
2,083
2,064
2,049
2,036
2,035
2,026
1,992
1,988
1,979
1,438
1,928
1,914
1,903
1,438
1,836
1,820
1,438
1,760
1,754
1,438

(2.4)
(2.1)
(2.2)
(2.4)
(2.3)
(2.4)
(3.0)
(2.5)
(1.9)
(2.7)
(2.2)
(3.0)
(2.4)
(2.1)
(2.4)
(2.2)
(2.1)
75.0
(2.4)
(3.0)
(2.7)
67.2
(3.5)
(2.4)
46.7
(2.1)
(2.1)
42.8

Proﬁt
$ (1,197)
$ (1,026)
$ (1,036)
$ (1,133)
$ (1,061)
$ (1,053)
$ (1,317)
$ (1,066)
$ (777)
$ (1,104)
$ (848)
$ (1,155)
$ (874)
$ (756)
$ (845)
$ (779)
$ (722)
$ 24,940
$ (799)
$ (975)
$ (834)
$ 20,575
$ (1,075)
$ (709)
$ 13,468
$ (608)
$ (605)
$ 19,275

Total

$(16,750)

$55,903

52 • Way of the Turtle

To overcome the third afﬂiction, you need to think about the
future in terms of possibilities and probabilities rather than in terms
of prediction. When my circle of friends learned of my success as a
Turtle, they kept asking what direction I thought a particular market
would take. Everyone assumed that because I was part of a renowned
trading group and had made millions trading futures, it must have
been because I knew something deﬁnitive about the future. My standard response surely surprised them: “I have no idea.” The truth was
that I really didn’t. Sure, I could have guessed, but I had absolutely
no faith in my ability to predict markets. In fact, I purposely did not
attempt to predict the future direction of markets.
Unfortunately, unless you happen to be an actuary working for
an insurance company, you generally do not think in terms of probabilities. People tend to think in terms of likely or unlikely but
never in terms of probabilities. That is why insurance companies
insure against uncertain risks. An event such as a hurricane destroying your house is one such risk. There is a certain probability that
there will be a hurricane that affects your house if you live near the
tropical ocean. There is a slightly lower probability that the hurricane will be strong enough to damage your home. There is an even
lower probability that it will be powerful enough to destroy your
home completely.
If you knew that your house would be destroyed by a hurricane with
100 percent certainty, you would not buy insurance; you would move.
Fortunately, the risk of that happening is less than 100 percent, so
much less in fact that you decide to stay and insure your house.
An insurance company that insures against hurricanes will have
a fairly good idea of the level of damage that is likely to occur at
your particular location when it prices a policy covering such an

Think Like a Turtle • 53

event. This is how insurance companies make money: They sell
policies to cover risks for less than the probable cost of payout under
those policies.
Trading is much the same as insuring against uncertain risks.
Trading is ﬁlled with uncertainties. You do not know whether a
trade is going to make money. The best you can do is be conﬁdent
that the rewards will outweigh the risks over the long run.

Thinking in Probabilities
Many of you took probability and statistics courses in high school
or college. No doubt you would have seen a graph like the one
shown in Figure 4-1.
Figure 4-1 shows what is known as a normal distribution. This
particular graph depicts the distribution of women’s height. The

Normal (Gaussian) Distribution
0.18

90%

Probability Density

0.14

80%
0.12

70%

0.1

60%

0.08

50%
40%

0.06

30%
0.04

20%

0.02

10%

0

0
54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

Figure 4-1

A Normal Distribution of Women’s Height

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Cumulative Probability

100%

0.16

54 • Way of the Turtle

bottom axis shows the height in inches, and the side axis indicates
the two aspects of probability:

1. Probability density graph: The shaded area uses the legend
on the left and shows how likely a particular height may be.
In this case, the average height is 5 feet 4 inches. The
probability of a woman’s height being closer to that average
is greater than its probability of being farther away. The
higher spots in the middle of the graph indicate the most
likely possibilities, and the lower height areas toward the
sides indicate less likely possibilities. For example, the
height of the curve at 70 inches is much lower than it is at
68 inches, indicating the lower probability that a woman
will attain a height of 5 foot 10 inches compared with a
height of 5 foot 8 inches.
2. Cumulative probability curve: The solid line runs from 0
percent to 100 percent and uses the legend on the right. It
shows the cumulative probability of a woman attaining at
least a particular height. For example, if you look at the
green line, you can see that it reaches almost 100 percent at
about the 70-inch level. The actual value at 70 inches is
99.18 percent, meaning that less than 1 percent of women
are 5 foot 10 inches or taller.

This graph and others like it use complex mathematical formulas, but they all represent a simple concept: There is a decreasing
likelihood of a woman attaining a particular height the farther away
that height is from the center that represents the average.

Think Like a Turtle • 55

But why make it so complicated to forecast probability? One
could ignore the math and formulas and still construct a graph like
the one shown in Figure 4-1 by using this simple method: First, go
to a place where you will ﬁnd a lot of women, such as a college
campus. Next, ﬁnd 100 women at random and measure their
height. Finally, divide those heights into 1-inch intervals and count
the number of women in each interval. You are fairly likely to get
around 16 women at 64 inches, about 15 at 63 and 65 inches,
about 12 at 62 and 66 inches, 8 at 61 and 67 inches, 4 at 60 and
68 inches, 2 at 59 and 69 inches, and one each at 58 and 70 inches.
If you created a bar chart showing the number of women at each
particular height, it would look like the chart shown in Figure 4-2.
The type of graph shown in Figure 4-2 is called a histogram. It
graphically shows the frequency of a particular measure compared with other nearby measures (in this case the measure of a
woman’s height). The graph in Figure 4-2 has the same shape as

Height Histogram

Number of Women

16

100%

14
80%

12
10

60%
8
40%

6
4

20%
2
0

10%
53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74

Figure 4-2

A Histogram of Women’s Heights

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Cumulative Percentage

18

56 • Way of the Turtle

the normal distribution graph in Figure 4-1, but it also has the
advantage of being something you can construct without using
complex mathematical formulas. You only need to be able to
count and categorize.
A histogram like this can be constructed from your trading systems to give you an idea of how the future might turn out; it provides you with a way to think in terms of probabilities rather than
prediction. Figure 4-3 is a histogram of monthly returns from a 20year test of a simpliﬁed version of the Turtle system, the Donchian
Trend system. In addition to being simpler, it has a better performance record than the Turtle system.
The histogram sections in Figure 4-3 are divided into 2 percent
segments. One bar lists the number of months with between 0 percent and 2 percent positive returns, the next bar lists the number
between 2 percent and 4 percent, and so on. Note how the shape
of the histogram resembles the normal distribution of heights
described above. The notable difference is that the shape is elongated toward the right. This elongation represents the good months
and sometimes is referred to as skew and fat tails.
The histogram shown in Figure 4-4 represents the distribution
of the trades themselves. Figure 4-4 shows how individual trades
are distributed. The section on the left is for losing trades, and the
section on the right is for winning trades. Note that the scales for
each section include both a number scale on the outside left and
right and a percentage scale in the middle from 0 percent to 100
percent. The cumulative lines move from 0 percent to 100 percent
from the center of the graph outward.
The numeric legends on the left and right indicate the number
of trades represented by each 20 percent section of the graph. For

Losing Months

Figure 4-3
Distribution of Monthly Returns

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.
2
2% %+
4% 4%
-6
6% %
8% - 8
%
10 - 10
% %
12 - 1
% 2%
14 - 1
% 4%
16 - 16
% %
18 - 1
% 8%
20 - 20
% %
22 - 22
% %
24 - 2
% 4%
26 - 2
% 6%
28 - 2
% 8%
-3
0%
30
%
+

28 30
% %+
26 - 30
% %
24 - 2
% 8%
22 - 2
% 6%
20 - 24
% %
18 - 2
% 2%
16 - 2
% 0%
14 - 18
% %
12 - 1
% 6%
10 - 14
% %
8% 12%
-1
6% 0%
4% 8%
2% 6%
0% 4%
-2
%

• 57 •
Number of Months
40
40

30
30

20
20

10
10

0
0

Winning Months

Number of Months

Monthly Return Distribution

3746

100%

1854

2997

80%

1483

2248

60%
1659

1497

1301
739

749
0

6

10

2.5R+ 2R

40%

742
406

20%

32
1.5R

1112
828

221

78

0%
1R

0.5R <0.5R

<1R

1R

2R

Losing Trades

Figure 4-4

371
126

Distribution of Trade Outcomes

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

3R

4R

42
5R

44

29

22

15

6R

7R

8R

9R

Winning Trades

6

9

10R 11R

5

2

12R 13R

3

18

14R 15R+

0

Number of Trades

• 58 •

Number of Trades

Donchian - R-Multiple™ Distribution

Think Like a Turtle • 59

example, the 100 percent level for losing trades is 3,746, which
means that there were 3,746 losing trades during the 22 years of
the test. The corresponding 100 percent level for winning trades is
1,854 trades.
The trades are divided into bars on the basis of the amount of
proﬁt they earned divided by the amount risked on a trade. This
concept is known as an R-multiple and was invented by the trader
Chuck Branscomb as a convenient way to compare trades between
systems and between markets. (R-multiples were popularized by
Van Tharp in his book Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom.)
An example will help illustrate this system. If you buy a contract
of August gold at $450 with a stop at $440 in case the trade goes
against you, you have $1,000 at risk since the $10 difference
between $450 and $440 multiplied by the 100 ounces in a contract
totals $1,000. If that trade earns $5,000 in proﬁt, it is called a 5R
trade because the $5,000 proﬁt is ﬁve times the amount of the
money that was risked ($1,000). In Figure 4-4, the winning trades
are divided into buckets at 1R intervals and losing trades are divided
into buckets at 1⁄2R intervals.
It may seem odd that in this histogram the losing trades outnumber the winning trades by so much. This is actually a very common occurrence in trend-following systems. However, although the
number of losing trades is very high, the system keeps most losses
close to the desired entry risk of 1R. Winning trades, in contrast,
are many times the entry risk, with 43 trades returning 10 or more
times the entry risk.
How does this help one think like a Turtle?
As Turtles, we never knew which trade would end up being a
winner and which a loser. We just knew the general shape of the

60 • Way of the Turtle

distribution of possible outcomes we might encounter: A distribution much like the ones shown in the graphs above. We thought
that each trade possibly could be a winner but that most probably
would be losers. And we knew that some would be medium-sized
winners of 4 to 5R and some would be large winners of 12R or even
20R or 30R. But ultimately, the Turtles knew that the winners
would be large enough to cover the losses from the losing trades
and that there would be proﬁt left over.
Thus, when we made a trade, we did not measure our personal
worth by the outcome of the trade because we knew it most likely
would be a losing trade. We thought in terms of probabilities, and
that gave us the conﬁdence to make decisions in the face of large
degrees of risk and uncertainty.

Dos and Don’ts for Thinking Like a Turtle
1. Trade in the present: Do not dwell on the past or try to predict
the future. The former is counterproductive, and the latter is
impossible.
2. Think in terms of probabilities, not prediction: Instead of trying
to be right by predicting the market, focus on methods in which
the probabilities are in your favor for a successful outcome over
the long run.
3. Take responsibility for your own trades: Don’t blame your
mistakes and failures on others, the markets, your broker,
and so forth. Take responsibility for your mistakes and learn
from them.

Think Like a Turtle • 61

Playing Favorites
Some of the Turtles had a hard time with this concept; they felt the
need to be right and to predict the markets. For this reason, even
after the ﬁrst month’s heating oil example, they did not trade consistently. I remember one in particular who was convinced that
Rich had given me and a few of the others secret rules that he had
not shared with the class at large. That idea was completely ludicrous. Why would Rich intentionally leave out important information and then give traders his own money for them to lose, not
to mention losing his bet?
There were no hidden secrets. The truth was that I actually used
a much simpler trading method than most of the other Turtles
employed. I traded using 100 percent of my account allocated to the
longer-term 10-week breakout system. This meant fewer trades and
less monitoring of the markets. I certainly was not doing anything
unusual or acting on information that had not been made public.

Excuses, Excuses
The idea that Rich had left out some key ideas was the easiest way
for our paranoid Turtle to explain his inability to trade successfully
during the program. This is a common problem in trading and in
life. Many people blame their failure on others or on circumstances
outside their control. They fail and then blame everyone but themselves. Inability to take responsibility for one’s own actions and their
consequences is probably the single most signiﬁcant factor leading
to failure.
Trading is a good way to break that habit. In the end, it is only
you and the markets. You cannot hide from the markets. If you

62 • Way of the Turtle

trade well, over the long run you will see good results. If you trade
poorly, over the long run you will lose money. Despite the obvious
and unavoidable link between what you do and your trading results,
some people still try to blame the markets. They invent scenarios
in which the “specialists” or another mysterious group of traders
conspires to steal their money rather than taking the blame for their
own trading mistakes.
Although there is no question that there many traders endeavoring to take your money at any point in time, I have never seen
any evidence of mass-scale collusion or fraud of the kind imagined
by those who blame their failures on the market, their brokers, or
other participants.
The bottom line is that you make the trades and you are responsible for the outcome. Don’t blame anyone else for giving you bad
advice or withholding secrets from you. If you screw up and do something stupid, learn from that mistake, don’t pretend you didn’t make
it. Then go ﬁgure out a way to avoid making that same mistake in
the future.
Blaming others for your mistakes is a sure way to lose.

five
TRADING WITH
AN EDGE
Trading with an edge is what separates the professionals from the
amateurs. Ignore this and you will be eaten by those who don’t.

rading is about buying at one price and then selling at a higher
price later or selling short at a particular price and then buying to exit the short position at a later point. When they are determining when to enter a market, most beginners employ a strategy
that is no better than throwing darts at the chart. Experienced
traders would say that their strategy has no edge. The term edge is
borrowed from gambling theory and refers to the statistical advantage held by the casino. It also refers to the advantage that can be
gained by counting cards when one is playing blackjack. Without
an edge in games of chance, you will lose money in the long run.
This is true in trading as well. If you do not have an edge, the
costs of trading will cause you to lose money. Commissions, slippage, computer costs, and exchange and pricing data fees add up
very quickly. An edge in trading is an exploitable statistical advantage based on market behavior that is likely to recur in the future. In

T

• 63 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

64 • Way of the Turtle

trading, the best edges come from the market behaviors caused by
cognitive biases.

Elements of an Edge
To ﬁnd an edge, you need to locate entry points where there is a
greater than normal probability that the market will move in a particular direction within your desired time frame. You then pair
those entries with an exit strategy designed to proﬁt from the type
of moves for which the entry is designed. Simply put, to maximize
your edge, entry strategies should be paired with exit strategies.
Thus, trend-following entry strategies can be paired with many different types of trend-following exit strategies, countertrend entry
strategies can be paired with many different countertrend exit
strategies, swing trading entries can be paired with many different
types of swing trading exit strategies, and so on.
To understand why this is important, let’s dig further into the
components that make up the edge for a system. System edges
come from three components:
• Portfolio selection: The algorithms that select which
markets are valid for trading on any speciﬁc day
• Entry signals: The algorithms that determine when to buy
or sell to enter a trade
• Exit signals: The algorithms that determine when to buy or
sell to exit a trade
It is possible for an entry signal to have an edge that is signiﬁcant
for the short term but not for the medium term or long term. Con-

Trading with an Edge • 65

versely, it is possible to have an exit signal that has an edge for longterm systems but not for the short term. Some concrete examples
will help demonstrate this effect.

The Edge Ratio (E-Ratio)
When you are examining entry signals, you care about the price
movement subsequent to the occurrence of the market actions that
constitute the signal. One way to look at this movement is to break
the price movement into two parts: the good part and the bad part.
Good price movement is that which progresses in the direction
of the trade. In other words, when you buy, it’s good when a market moves up and bad when it moves down, and when you sell
short, it’s good when a market moves down and bad when it moves
up. Consider the case where a buy results in a price that initially
moves in a direction that is bad for the trade, the price goes down;
then it goes up and moves to a price higher than the entry price for
the trade; after this move down, the price moves up for a while and
then goes down again, as shown in Figure 5.1.
Traders refer to the maximum move in the bad direction as the
maximum adverse excursion (MAE) and the maximum move in the
good direction as the maximum favorable excursion (MFE). Thus,
the lines with the double arrows in the ﬁgure show the size of the
MAE and MFE for the price move indicated. Figure 5-1 demonstrates the case where the MFE (good price movement) is much
higher than the MAE (bad price movement).
You can use these to measure the edge of an entry signal directly.
If a certain entry signal generates a move in which the average maximum good movement was higher than the average maximum bad

66 • Way of the Turtle

Good vs. Bad Price Movement

Buy

Buy

Bad Price Movement

Figure 5-1

Good Price Movement

Good versus Bad Price Movement

movement (i.e., the average MFE was higher than the average
MAE), this would indicate that a positive edge existed. If the average MAE (adverse movement) was higher than the average MFE
(good movement), this would indicate that a negative edge existed.
One would expect that a truly random entry would result in approximately the same good movement as bad movement. For example,
take the case in which one bought if a coin landed heads up and
sold if it landed tails up. One would expect that the price movement subsequent to this type of entry would have an MFE equal
to its MAE.
To turn this way of thinking about an edge of an entry into a
concrete way of measuring the edge for entry signals, it is necessary to add a few more steps. First, you need a way to equate price
movement across different markets. Second, you need a way to
determine the time period over which to measure the average
MFE and average MAE. To normalize the MFE and MAE across
markets so that you can compare the averages meaningfully, you
can use the same mechanism the Turtles used to normalize the
size of our trades across markets: equating them by using the average true range (ATR).

Trading with an Edge • 67

To isolate the behavior of entries over various markets, it is useful to be able to compare the price behavior of an entry signal
across different time frames. I usually examine a speciﬁc number
of days and then measure the MFE and MAE for that number of
days after each signal is generated. At Trading Blox, where I head
Research and Development for a sophisticated system-testing environment, we have implemented an entry edge measure we call the
E-ratio (short for edge ratio).
The E-ratio combines all of the pieces described above by using
the following formula:
1. Compute the MFE and MAE for the time frame speciﬁed.
2. Divide each of them by the ATR at entry to adjust for
volatility and normalize across markets.
3. Sum each of these values separately and divide by the total
number of signals to get the average volatility-adjusted MFE
and MAE.
4. The E-ratio is the average volatility-adjusted MFE divided
by the average volatility-adjusted MAE.
To deﬁne the time frame, we use the number of days in the
description of the ratio to indicate the number of days over which the
component MFE and MAE were computed. For example, an E10ratio measurement computes the MFE and MAE for 10 days, including the day of entry; an E50-ratio uses 50 days, and so on.
The E-ratio can be used to measure whether an entry has an
edge. For example, you can use it to test whether a completely random entry has any edge. To illustrate, I ran a test of the E-ratio for
the period of the last 10 years by using an entry that randomly

68 • Way of the Turtle

enters long or short at the open, depending on the computer equivalent of a coin ﬂip. The average of 30 individual tests showed an
E5-ratio of 1.01, an E10-ratio of 1.005, and an E50-ratio of 0.997.
These numbers are very close to the 1.0 we would expect, and if
we ran more trials, the numbers would get closer and closer to 1.0.
This is the case because the price is just as likely to go against a
position as it is to go in a direction favorable to a position over any
reasonable time period.
You can also use the E-ratio to examine the major components
of the Donchian Trend system. The two major components of the
entries for this system are a Donchian channel breakout and a trend
portfolio ﬁlter. The Donchian channel breakout is a rule that states
that one should buy when the price exceeds the highest high of the
previous 20 days and sell short when the price goes lower than the
lowest low of the previous 20 days. The trend portfolio ﬁlter means
that you can initiate long trades only in markets in which the 50day moving average is higher than the 300-day moving average and
can initiate short trades only in markets in which the 50-day moving average is lower than the 300-day moving average. One of the
roles of the portfolio ﬁlter is to eliminate markets that are not in a
market state favorable to this system.
Let me show you how to use the E-ratio to examine the tradeentry rules for the Donchian Trend system. All the tests described
below were performed by using a set of 28 high-volume U.S. futures
markets, employing data from January 1, 1996, to June 30, 2006.
The E5-ratio for our sample is 0.99, and the E10-ratio is 1.0. “Wait
a minute,” you might say. “I thought that the E-ratio would be greater
than 1 when an entry had a positive edge.” This is true. However,
remember that we need to consider that the Donchian channel

Trading with an Edge • 69

breakout system is a medium-term, trend-following system, so its entry
needs to have an edge over the medium term, not the short term. One
might say more generally that an entry needs to have an edge only
over the time frame for the system in which it is being used.
The E70-ratio for our entry is 1.20, which means that trades
taken in the direction of a 20-day breakout move on average 20 percent farther in the direction of the breakout than they do in the
opposite direction when one looks at the price movement in the
70 days subsequent to the entry signal.
Figure 5-2 shows how the edge ratio changes for 20-day breakouts over varying numbers of days. First, the edge ratio starts off
below 1.0, meaning that over the very short term there is generally
more movement against a trade taken at a breakout than there is
in the direction of the breakout. This is one of the reasons trading
breakouts can be very difﬁcult psychologically. It is also one of the
reasons you can make money using a countertrend trading style by
betting on the breakout not holding and in favor of a bounce off of
the support or resistance. There is a positive edge for these strategies in the very short term.
Second, the edge ratio begins to climb steadily but still ﬂuctuates fairly erratically on the positive side of 1.0, indicating a positive edge but one where it is difﬁcult to quantify with true precision.

The Trend Portfolio Filter Edge
How do the portfolio selection criteria affect the edge for the
Donchian channel system? You can examine this in two ways. First,
you can look at how the portfolio selection ﬁlter affects the edge of
purely random entries and compare them with the baseline edge

Edge-Ratio as Edge-Ratio Days Varies
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8

• 70 •

0.6
0.4
0.2

Edge-Ratio Days

Figure 5-2

Edge Ratio as Number of Days Varies

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

0

5

15

14

0

5
14
0

13

13

11
5
12
0
12
5

0
10
5
11
0

95

10

90

85

80

75

70

65

60

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0.0

Trading with an Edge • 71

ratio of 1.0 for random entries without any portfolio ﬁltering. Second, you can combine the ﬁlter with our entry signals to see how the
portfolio trend ﬁlter affects the edge ratio of our breakout signals.
Running a test of 70,000 random entries with the trend portfolio ﬁlter shows a remarkable E70-ratio of 1.27. This is even greater
than the E70-ratio for the entry signal itself. This serves as a clear
indication that this portfolio selection algorithm increases the edge
of the system.
Using a trend portfolio ﬁlter substantially increases the likelihood
of movement in the direction of a trade taken with a breakout. The
E70-ratio for our example moved from 1.20 to 1.33. Further, the
use of a trend ﬁlter combined with a breakout changes the shape
and smoothness of the resulting edge ratio graph (Figure 5-3).
Notice how much smoother the graph in Figure 5-3 is and how
much higher the edge ratio climbs after we add the trend portfolio
ﬁlter. The graph shows that the E120-ratio is about 1.6.
The reason for this result is that breakout trades that go against
the long-term trend have been eliminated. Those trades were a
source of many of the signiﬁcant moves against the initial position
since breakouts that occur in the direction opposite a trend are
much less likely to result in signiﬁcant continuation. These breakouts are also indicative of the market being in a state which is not
as favorable to the Donchian Trend system.

The Exit Edge
Even the exit signals for a system should have an edge if possible.
Unfortunately, it is somewhat more difﬁcult to measure the edge of
an exit. This is the case because exits are dependent on the condi-

Edge-Ratio as Edge-Ratio Days Varies
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0

• 72 •

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Edge-Ratio Days

Figure 5-3

Edge Ratio with Addition of Trend Filter

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

5
15
0

0

14

5

14

0

13

13

0

11
5
12
0
12
5

5

11

0

10

95

10

90

85

80

75

70

65

60

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

5

10

0

0.0

Trading with an Edge • 73

tions of both the entry and the exit signals. In other words, you cannot isolate an exit from the conditions that cause a position to be
initiated. There is a more complex set of interactions between the
various elements of a system rather than just a single component.
Since it is a more complex system, you are less concerned with
the edge of an exit than with its effect on the measurement criteria of the system itself. For this reason, it is better to measure the
effect of an exit on those measurements which matter most rather
than simply by looking at what happens after the exit. Furthermore,
when you are looking at entries into the market, you are indeed
concerned with what happens after you enter, since that is the
period in which your money is in play. Traders make money only
when they are in the market.
Exits are different. What happens after an exit does not affect
your results; only what happens before the exit has an effect. For
these reasons, you should judge exits on the basis of how they affect
the performance of the entire system.

This page intentionally left blank

six
FALLING OFF
THE EDGE
Edges are found in the places that are the battlegrounds
between buyers and sellers. Your task as a trader is to ﬁnd
those places and wait to see who wins and who loses.

rading edges exist because of divergences in market perceptions and realities that result from cognitive biases. They exist
because economists are wrong in their belief that market players
are rational. Market players are not rational. Chapter 2 discussed
how cognitive biases provide trading opportunities in a theoretical
sense. This chapter will discuss that notion in further detail by
using actual price data.

T

Support and Resistance
The concept of support and resistance is fundamental to almost all
types of trading. Support and resistance is simply the tendency for
prices not to exceed previous price levels. One can understand this
concept most easily by examining its presence on a price chart (see
Figure 6-1).
• 75 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

76 • Way of the Turtle

KC: Coffee-CSCE
125

120

115

Resistance 2
Support 1

Resistance 1

110

Resistance 3

105

Support 3
Support 4

100

Support 2

Figure 6-1

00
20

00

ov
N

ct
O

Se

p

20

20

00

0
20
0
A
ug

Ju

l2

00
0

00
20
Ju
n

M

ay

20

00

95

Support and Resistance Levels

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Support and resistance results from market behavior, which in
turn is caused by three cognitive biases: anchoring, recency bias,
and the disposition effect.
Anchoring is the tendency to base price perceptions on readily
available information. A recent new high or low becomes a new
anchor against which each subsequent price is measured and compared. New prices are considered to be higher or lower in comparison to those anchor prices. The reason recent highs and lows
are easy anchors is that they are simple to see on the charts and
therefore are psychologically signiﬁcant to market participants.
In Figure 6-1, under the label “Support 1,” a low price of about
$1.13 becomes a new anchor shortly after that price is made and
certainly after the price climbs to $1.20 over the next several days.
It is the low point on the chart that will stand out for short-term day

Falling Off the Edge • 77

traders and longer-term position traders alike. As the price descends
back to the range of $1.15, over the days after the high at about
$1.23, traders continue to think in terms of the previous but still
recent $1.13 low. At $1.15 they will judge the price as low but not
too low on the basis of a comparison with that anchor price at $1.13.
Recency bias is the tendency for people to place greater importance on more recent data and experience. Since the low at $1.13
was recent, it will count more in a trader’s evaluation of the current price than will other previous lows. That low will have a
greater meaning to the market participant because of this bias. How
does this affect the support and resistance phenomenon?
Imagine that you are a trader who wants to buy coffee. When
the price ﬁrst went to $1.13, you might have wished or hoped that
it would go even lower and therefore might not have purchased
coffee at that price. As the price climbed to $1.23 over the next several days, you would have been very unhappy that you did not buy
any coffee below $1.15 because you are now anchoring on that
recent $1.13 low which becomes the basis for a more concrete
sense of a “low” price. Thus, when the price drops below $1.15 a
few days later, you will be much more likely to buy even though
the price is the same as it was the last time the price was there a
few days earlier. The effect of anchoring and the recency bias will
cause you to consider any price below $1.15 as reasonably low and
therefore a good price at which to buy. Since many market participants similarly consider a price below $1.15 as good, any pause in
the price movement below that price probably will result in more
buyers coming into the market. This inﬂux of new buyers at points
of support creates a tendency for market prices to bounce off the
price levels of previous highs and lows.

78 • Way of the Turtle

The perception of most traders that support and resistance is a
real phenomenon adds to the reality of its existence because the
market behavior of those who believe in it by itself reinforces that
phenomenon. If many traders believe that there will be signiﬁcant
buying when a price drops to a certain level, they will be more
inclined to believe that the price will rise once it reaches that level.
This belief in and of itself will reduce their willingness to sell at or
near that price since they will prefer to sell later, after the price has
risen—because of the effect of support at the price. The belief in
support and resistance causes it to become a self-fulﬁlling prophecy.
The disposition effect is the tendency for traders to want to lock
in proﬁts rather than let winning trades get larger. Traders’ fear of
losing proﬁts grows stronger as those proﬁts rise. How does this
affect support and resistance?
Imagine that you were a trader who bought coffee in early
August at 102 just after the end of the area labeled “Support 2” in
Figure 6-1. When the price rose to 114 over the next several days,
you probably would not have sold because the price moved so
quickly in your favor that you would have believed that it might go
as high as 120 or 125. Subsequently, when the price dropped to
105, you found yourself wishing that you had sold it over 110. The
recent high would have had you thinking, “If the price gets over
114 again, I am going to sell this time.”
Thus, when the price does in fact go back up to that level, you
want to lock in your proﬁts and sell at that time. There probably
will be many others in a similar position who also will want to sell
when the price again approaches those recent highs (the area
labeled “Resistance 2”). This creates a natural barrier at that price
because many traders will want to sell at what they consider a high

Falling Off the Edge • 79

price. Since the previous highs set in early August become the
anchor against which subsequent prices are measured, prices that
approach that price are considered high. Therefore, more and
more traders are willing to sell as the price approaches those highs.

Finding the Edge in Support and Resistance
Like many aspects of trading, the concept of support and resistance
is a loose construct rather than a hard-and-fast rule. Prices are not
guaranteed to bounce off former highs and lows; they just tend to.
Prices are not guaranteed to bounce off the exact price of a high
and a low; sometimes they react a bit before, sometimes a bit after,
and sometimes not at all.
If one is employing a countertrend strategy, support and resistance is the direct source of the edge. The tendency for prices to
bounce off previous highs and lows is what provides the edge for
countertrend traders. When support and resistance holds up, the
countertrend traders who rely on its effect will make money.
If one is using a trend-following system, the breakdown of support and resistance is what matters. Consider what happened when
the support level did not hold in the case of the December 2006
heating oil contract (see Figure 6-2).
The support at $2.10 per gallon held the ﬁrst time it was tested
in mid-June. The price bounced off $2.10 and then stopped at
$2.31, which served as a new resistance level. When the price
bounced off the support line at $2.16, it went higher but was unable
to exceed the resistance level at $2.31. Note what happened the second time the price reached the level marked “Support 2.” This time
the price hesitated, showing that there was some buying pressure at

80 • Way of the Turtle

HO: Petroleum-Heating Oil #2-NYMEX (Floor Trading Only)
2.40

Resistance
2.30

2.20

Support 2
2.10

Support 1
2.00

1.90

1.80

1.70

Support 3

Figure 6-2

00

00

20
ov
N

O

p
Se

ct

20

20

00

00
20
A
ug

00
l2
Ju

Ju

n

20

00

0

1.60

Support Breaks Down

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

that price but it did not hold up. The price dropped below the “Support 1” line, where it initially also moved upward for a few days,
showing that there was some buying pressure at that level as well.
It is what happened next that is the most interesting, especially if
you consider the likely psychological perspectives of the various market participants. On September 5, the price dropped and closed
below the previous low at $2.05, which had been set on August 30,
just three trading days earlier. That meant that anyone who recently
had initiated a long position by buying heating oil in anticipation of
higher prices was holding a losing trade. Further, there were no
recent price points that one could expect would offer support, meaning that there was a signiﬁcant possibility that if the price fell, it might

Falling Off the Edge • 81

fall quite a bit. As Figure 6-2 indicates, this is exactly what happened.
The price fell all the way to $1.85, where there was some weak buying, probably as a result of a previous support line at that level seven
months earlier. This line did not hold, and the price did not start to
come back up until late September after hitting a low of $1.73.
Smart countertrend traders would have been out near or on the
close on September 5 or perhaps the following morning. They
know that sometimes support holds and sometimes it doesn’t, and
you do not want to ﬁght the market when it does not or you could
be wiped out. This could have been one of those instances.
Imagine that you had been bullish on heating oil and had
bought 5 contracts at $2.10 in anticipation of higher prices; you
might have bought 5 more contracts at $2.05 as the price became
even cheaper when measured against the anchor of the recent
$2.10 price support level. What would you have been thinking as
the price dropped below $2.00 or $1.90 and then broke $1.80 a few
days later? That small 5-contract trade that developed into a 10contract losing trade would now be a whopping $115,500 loss (10
contracts with a $0.275 per gallon loss per contract on average with
each contract being for 42,000 gallons).
This kind of thing happens all the time to new traders. They
panic and ﬁnd themselves on the wrong side of the market when
it moves swiftly and suddenly against them. Trend followers love
these occurrences because they are selling on the way down, and
as the market makes new lows, they are making money.
The source of the edge for trend followers is the gap in human perception at the time when support and resistance breaks down. At
those times, people hold on to previous beliefs for too long and the
market does not move quickly enough to reﬂect the new reality.

82 • Way of the Turtle

That is why there is a statistically signiﬁcant tendency for the markets to move further when support and resistance breaks down than
at other times.
In the case above, there are no new buyers at the prices below
the initial resistance at the end of the “Support 1” line. If you
wanted to buy heating oil and the price was dropping below $2.05,
why would you buy there? You wouldn’t; you would wait until the
price had stopped dropping. Why buy now if the price is dropping?
Yet as the price continues to drop, even more people who need to
sell will panic, sending the price lower and lower. This will continue until the selling exhausts itself and some of those who wish
to buy start to believe that the price will not drop further.
The Turtles saw this happen time and time again. Sometimes
we were initiating positions, and during those times we were happy
with the subsequent price movements. Sometimes we were exiting
positions, and at those times we were among those trying to exit our
proﬁtable positions as we saw the support break down.
A breakout occurs when the price “breaks out” of previous resistance and support levels. As breakout traders, we were buying resistance breakdowns to enter long trades and selling support
breakdowns to enter short trades. We sold short-term support breakdowns to exit long trades and bought short-term resistance breakdowns to exit short trades.

Shaky Ground
The prices near the edges of support and resistance represent what I
call points of price instability. They represent places where prices are
unlikely to remain but are more likely to move higher or lower. In the

Falling Off the Edge • 83

case where support holds, the price moves higher. In the case where
resistance holds, the price moves lower, bouncing off the resistance.
In cases where support and resistance do not hold, the prices continue to move in the direction of the breakdown and often do so for
quite some distance. When a price level has been broken that the
market has not seen for some time, there is generally no obvious subsequent point where one is likely to encounter further support or
resistance. There are no remaining obvious anchors that might serve
as potential turning points for change in trader psychology.
In both of the examples described above, the price is not likely
to remain at the unstable price point. That is why I use the word
unstable to describe those points. There is too much pressure at
those points. One side or the other will win the battle of psychological warfare, and as the exhausted side gives up, the price will
move up or down. It generally will not stay where it was. Points of
price instability represent good trading opportunities. This is the
case because at these points there is a relatively small price difference between a trade working and not working. This means that
the cost of being wrong is lower.
The battle analogy is apt for another reason. In classic battles,
the General of the attacking army waits until the best opportunity
for success presents itself. He may send small forays to test the
defenses of the enemy, but he does not put the full weight of his
army into the attack until the proper time. When prices are in
between support and resistance levels, each side is not really
engaged in the battle so it is difﬁcult to see who will win or lose. As
the prices draw closer to those levels each side becomes more and
more committed. One of the sides will lose. The price cannot both
break out and fail to break out. It will do one or the other.

84 • Way of the Turtle

It is easiest to tell who will win a battle when it is nearly over. It
is also easiest to tell whether the buyer or seller will win the psychological battle of support and resistance after they’ve engaged
and you can see the price either continuing to break out through
that support or resistance or clearly bouncing off of it.
Using Figure 6-2 as an example, a countertrend trader who
bought at $2.10 in anticipation of an upward move could place a
stop 6¢ below that entry, as that price would represent a breakdown
of the support. Likewise, a trend-following trader who sold the
breakout at $2.10 could place a stop $0.05 or $0.06 above the entry
at $2.15 or $2.16. A price that reached those levels after hitting
$2.10 would be showing enough strength to indicate that the support was holding.
Edges come from places where there are systematic misperceptions as a result of cognitive biases. Those places are the battlegrounds between buyers and sellers. Good traders examine the
evidence and place bets on what they perceive to be the winning
side. They also learn to admit when they have made the wrong bet
and quickly ﬁx the situation by exiting the trade. Subsequent chapters will build on these concepts and look at complete systems.

seven
BY WHAT MEASURE?
Mature understanding of and respect for risk is the
hallmark of the best traders. They know that if you don’t keep
an eye on risk, it will set its eye on you.

key question, perhaps the only question, to ask when you are
considering a system-based trading strategy or trying to select
a fund advisor who uses such a strategy is: “How can you know
whether a system or a manager is a good one?” In general, the
answers the industry offers are various takes on the following: The
strategy or manager with the highest risk/reward ratio.
Everyone wants to make the most money for a speciﬁc level
of risk or incur the least risk for a particular level of expected
return. On this point we are almost all in agreement: traders,
investors, fund operators, and so forth. Unfortunately, there are
many different opinions on the best measures of the risk and
reward parts of the risk/reward ratio. Sometimes the ﬁnancial
industry deﬁnes risk in such a way that the description completely blinds it to certain kinds of risks, and those risks are just
as likely to bite them in the ass as are the ones with which they
do concern themselves.

A

• 85 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

86 • Way of the Turtle

The large losses incurred in the implosion of Long-Term Capital
Management are a good example of risks that existed outside the traditional measures. This chapter will review those risks and ways to
account for them, and then propose some general mechanisms for
estimating risk and reward for trading systems by using historical data.
Rich and Bill were very concerned with the size of our positions
because they knew that there was a risk of losing their entire net
worth if those positions were too large during a large adverse price
movement. A few years before starting the Turtle program, they had
traded during a period when the silver market was locked down
limit for days and days. This meant that there was no opportunity
to exit because there were no traders willing to buy within the limits imposed by the COMEX futures exchange on how much the
price of silver could change in a single day. This is the futures
trader’s worst nightmare. Each day you are losing more and more
money and there is nothing you can do about it.
Fortunately, Rich was able to trim his position before this occurred,
and that probably saved him tens of millions of dollars. If he had not
acted quickly, he would have lost everything. I am sure the memory
of that move was vivid in their minds during the Turtle program.
Rich constantly monitored the Turtles’ positions and sometimes
would reduce his own positions if he felt that the aggregate risk was
too great. Contrary to the popular notion that Rich was sometimes
a gunslinger, in my experience he was very careful with his risk.

Risky Business
Because there are many different types of risk, there are many different ways of measuring it. There are big risks that may come

By What Measure? • 87

from relatively infrequent occurrences, those which happen once
or twice a decade; there are more common risks that one might
expect to occur a few times each year. Most traders worry about
four primary risks:
• Drawdowns: Strings of losses that reduce the capital in their
trading accounts
• Low returns: Periods of small gains in which one does not
make enough money to live on
• Price shocks: Sudden movements in one or more markets
that result in a large unrecoverable loss
• System death: A change in market dynamics that causes a
previously proﬁtable system to start losing money
Let’s examine each of these risks and then consider assessments
that can be incorporated into risk/reward measures for evaluating
traders and trading systems.

Drawdowns
The drawdown is probably the risk that causes the most traders to
stop trading and results in the most traders ending up as net losers.
The equity curve shown in Figure 7-1 represents the results of trading with an account of $100,000 from January 1996 until May 2006
using the Donchian Trend system.
From the graph, you can see that the equity has grown at an average compounded rate of 43.7 percent over the slightly more than
10 years of the test. There was also a period during the test that
exhibited a 38 percent drawdown.

Equity Curve - Log Scale

$5,000.000

$2,000,000

$1,000,000

• 88 •

$500,000

$200,000

Figure 7-1

Donchian Trend Results: January 1996 to May 2006

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Ja

n

00

5

20
06

05

l2
Ju

Ja

n

20

00

4

04

l2
Ju

00
3

20
n

Ja

03

l2
Ju

2

20

00

n

l2

Total Equity

Ja

Ju

n
Ja

l2
Ju

20

00

1

02

01

0

20

00
l2

n
Ja

Ju

9

20
00

99

n
Ja

19
99

l1
Ju

Ja

n

99
8

98

l1
Ju

7

19

99
l1

n
Ja

Ju

n
Ja

Ju

l1

99

6

19
97

$100,000

By What Measure? • 89

Many new traders will be seduced by the proﬁts of a system with
results like this, thinking, “Surely I can sustain a 38 percent loss in
return for these kinds of proﬁts.” Unfortunately, experience has
shown time and again that people are not very good at estimating
their tolerance for these sorts of things. This is especially the case
if all you are looking at is a graph like the one in Figure 7-1, which
uses a logarithmic scale that tends to make drawdowns look smaller
than they look on a standard scale.
Conﬁdent in the results of this system and in his ability to withstand these sorts of drawdowns, trader John Newbie begins trading
on June 1 with $100,000. Figure 7-2 shows the same results as those
in Figure 7-1 updated until the end of October 2006, using a linear scale that outlines the historical drawdowns.
Shortly after Newbie begins trading on June 1, the system enters
a period of drawdown that is slightly higher than anything shown
in previous tests: a drawdown of 42 percent. What is going through
his mind at this point?
Lots of doubts, fear, anxiety, and countless questions:
“What if the system has stopped working?”
“What if this is just the beginning of an even larger
drawdown?”
“What if there was something wrong with the way I did my
testing?”
“What if . . .?”
These types of doubts often cause a new trader to stop using the
system or start selectively taking trades to “reduce risk.” Many times
this results in the trader missing out on winning trades, and in a

Equity Curve - Linear Scale with Drawdowns
$6,000.000
$5,500.000
$5,000,000
$4,500.000
$4,000.000
$3,500.000
$3,000.000
$2,500.000
$2,000.000
$1,500.000
$1,000.000
$500.000

• 90 •

$0
0%
–10%
–20%
–30%
–40%

Total Equity and Drawdowns

Figure 7-2

Donchian Trend Results: January 1996 to October 2006

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

6
00
l2

20
n
Ja

Ju

5

06

05

00
l2

Ju

4

20

00

n

l2
Ju

Ja

3

04

00

20

l2

n

Ju

Ja

2

03

00

20

l2

n

Ju

Ja

1

02

00

20

l2

n

Ju

Ja

0

01

00

20

l2

n
Ja

Ju

20
n
Ja

Ju

l1

99

00

9

99

8
99

19

l1

n

Ju

Ja

7
99

19
n

l1
Ju

Ja

6

97

99

19

l1

n
Ja

Ju

98

–50%

By What Measure? • 91

frustrated state, after having lost one-half or more of the initial
account, the trader bails. This is the major reason new traders are
unsuccessful even when they use valid strategies: They have overestimated their ability to withstand the large ﬂuctuations that come
from trading at aggressive risk levels.
From my personal observations, most people cannot sustain
drawdowns of this sort. A successful trader who has a lot of conﬁdence in his trading, his system, and his testing may be able to withstand a large drawdown, but a prudent new trader should adjust his
risk accordingly to reduce the likely drawdowns. This inevitably
also means reducing the returns that will come from trading the
system. That is a wise compromise.
As Turtles, we were lucky since our boss, Richard Dennis, did
not look at drawdowns that happened as a result of giving back profits in the same way that he looked at drawdowns that happened
because of a string of losses. He knew that giving back part of the
proﬁts was a part of the game for trend followers.
For that reason, he was a very easy boss for whom to manage
money. Most other investors would have panicked with the kinds
of drawdowns we sometimes incurred. If you look at the returns of
the former Turtles who have been the most successful at raising
outside money, you will see that they are trading at a greatly
reduced level from their Turtle days. This is practically a requirement if you want to raise institutional money.
Unfortunately, you cannot make the 100 percent plus returns
we did as Turtles without drawdowns at these levels. I think my
worst drawdown was something on the order of 70 percent. I don’t
know many people who can sustain that level of drawdown. It is
very difﬁcult on most people’s psyches.

92 • Way of the Turtle

Low Returns
If a trader is expecting to achieve returns of 30 percent per trade,
this goal can be achieved by using a system that returns 30 percent
each year reliably or by one that returns 5 percent in year 1, 5 percent in year 2, and 100 percent in year 3. After three years, each of
these systems will have returned the same average CAGR (compound average growth rate) of 30 percent. However, most traders
would argue that a system that returned 30 percent each year would
be preferable because it would offer a smoother equity curve.
All else being equal, we have found that a system that consistently delivers good returns will be more likely to offer good returns
in any future period. Therefore, the risk of having that system
deliver subpar returns in any given single year will be lower than
for a system that had more erratic historical returns.

Price Shocks
A price shock is a sudden or very rapid movement in price that generally is caused by a natural catastrophe, unforeseen political event,
or economic disaster. Since I started trading, there have been two
very notable price shocks: the U.S. stock market crash of 1987 with
its subsequent ﬁnancial repercussions and the September 11, 2001
attack on the World Trade Center in New York City.
The ﬁrst price shock occurred when I was trading a $20 million
account for Richard Dennis. I remember it well. I actually made a
bit of money on the day of the crash, but the next day was a different story.
Eurodollars closed on Black Monday, October 19, 1987, at
90.64, close to their contract low of 90.15 that had been set two
days previously and had been tested earlier that morning with a low

By What Measure? • 93

at 90.18. I was short something like 1,200 contracts of December
eurodollars and another 600 T-bills. I also had signiﬁcant long positions in gold and silver and large positions in a few currencies.
The next morning the eurodollar opened up at 92.85, more
than two points higher and about $5,500 per contract without any
opportunity to exit. This was a price we had not seen in eight
months. Additionally, gold opened down $25 and silver opened
down over $1. Figure 7-3 shows the eurodollar market on the day
of this price shock.
In total, I was down about $11 million on the $20 million
account I was trading for Richard Dennis. Essentially my entire
year’s proﬁts had vanished overnight.
ED: Eurodollar - December 1987 Contract

93.5

93.0

92.5

92.0

91.5

91.0

90.5

Figure 7-3

87

87

Effect of Price Shock on Eurodollar Price

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

19
ov
N

ct
O

Se
p

19

19

87

87
19
A
ug

Ju

l

19

87

90.0

94 • Way of the Turtle

It was amusing in an ironic sense that the day of the crash I made
money. It was the government freaking out and lowering interest rates
overnight with no warning that killed me. Now that was a price shock.
Figure 7-4 is a graph that shows an initial trading account of
$100,000 using the Donchian Trend system from the time we
started trading as Turtles in 1984 until the end of 1987.
You can clearly see the large spike representing a 65 percent
drawdown. It is important to remember that that drawdown
occurred overnight. There was no chance to exit the market. It is
also interesting to note that the drawdown from that single day was
twice anything the system would have indicated through historical
testing. In other words, the historical testing would have understated the drawdown by a factor of 2.
All traders who wish to stay in business would be prudent to keep
the reality of price shocks in mind as they settle on an appropriate
risk level for their accounts. Anyone who wants to earn high returns
runs an equally high risk of experiencing a high drawdown or even
a total loss of her entire trading equity if a large price shock occurs.

System Death
System death is the risk that a system that has been working or that
appears to have worked on the basis of historical testing suddenly
stops functioning and starts losing money. This risk comes more
from relying on poor testing methods than from the markets themselves. It is also a larger risk for those who trade short-term systems
that have been optimized for recent price action.
For a new trader it may be quite difﬁcult to distinguish between
a system that is merely in a drawdown period and one that genuinely has stopped working. I would venture that this is probably

Equity Curve - Linear Scale with Drawdowns
$4,000,000
$3,500,000
$3,000,000
$2,500,000
$2,000,000
$1,500,000
$1,000,000
$500,000

• 95 •

$0
0%

–20%

–40%

–60%

Large Drawdown Resulting from the October 1987 Price Shock

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

87
ec

19

19
87
D

ct
O

l1

98
7

87
Ju

A

pr

19
n

Total Equity and Drawdowns

Figure 7-4

19

87

19
86
Ja

ct
O

l1

98
6

86
19

19

pr
A

Ju

86

85
n
Ja

O

ct

19

98
5

85

l1
Ju

pr
A

Ja

n

19

19

85

84

4

19

98

ct
O

l1
Ju

A

pr

19

84

–80%

96 • Way of the Turtle

the greatest source of anxiety for new traders. They encounter a
drawdown and then begin to question their methods: “Did I do
something wrong in testing?” “Did the markets change in some
way that makes my methods invalid?” “Is this going to continue?”
Ways to mitigate the risk of system death will be discussed in later
chapters. Unfortunately, however, since the markets are dynamic
and are composed of many other participants, it is a reality that markets change, and this can affect the results of systems and methods
that previously worked; sometimes those changes can be permanent. One of the ways great traders distinguish themselves from
average traders is by their ability to adhere to methods that others
have tired of and discarded and be successful with them.
This consequence that certain market participants stop trading with
certain styles because they believe that those styles no longer work has
an interesting side effect for trend followers. Every few years trendfollowing traders experience a period of losses, and inevitably some
expert will announce the end of trend following. This usually coincides with a large withdrawal of money from trend-following funds.
As more and more money ﬂees from trend-following strategies, those
strategies start to become proﬁtable again, often spectacularly so. At
least three or four times since the Turtle program began someone has
made the claim that trend following has ceased to work. I always laugh
at this, knowing that proﬁtable markets are most likely quite near.

Measuring What You Cannot See
There are many ways to quantify risk, which is one way to factor in
the pain you would have encountered while trading a particular
system. Here are some common measures that I ﬁnd useful:

By What Measure? • 97

1. Maximum drawdown: This is a single number that
represents the highest percentage loss from peak to
subsequent equity low during the course of a test. In Figure
7-4 this would be the 65 percent drawdown that was due to
the price shock of the 1987 crash.
2. Longest drawdown: The largest period from a peak in equity
to a subsequent new peak. This is a measure of how long it
would take to regain new equity highs after a losing streak.
3. Standard deviation of returns: This is a measure of the
dispersion of returns. A low standard deviation of returns
indicates that most returns are near the average; a high
standard deviation indicates that returns vary more from
month to month.
4. R-squared: This is a measure of smoothness of ﬁt to the line
that represents the CAGR%. A ﬁxed-return investment such
as an interest-bearing account would have an R-squared
value of 1.0, whereas a very erratic set of returns would have
a value lower than 1.0.

The Flip Side of Risk: Rewards
There are many ways to quantify a reward, which in the case of a
particular trading system relates to the amount of money you might
expect to earn when trading that method. Here are some common
measures that I ﬁnd useful:
• CAGR%: The compound annual growth rate, also known as
the geometric average return, reﬂects the rate of growth that
when compounded equally over the speciﬁc period would

98 • Way of the Turtle

have resulted in identical ending equity. For simple interestbearing accounts this is equal to the rate of interest itself.
This measure can be affected greatly by a single period of
high returns.
• Average one-year trailing return: This is the measure of the
average return for a rolling one-year period. This measure
gives a better sense of what the typical return might be in any
speciﬁc one-year period. It is relatively less sensitive to a single
period of high returns for tests of more than a few years.
• Average monthly return: This is the average of each single
month’s returns over the period of the test.
In addition to these single number measures, I ﬁnd it useful to
examine the equity curve itself as well as a graph that highlights the
distribution of monthly returns, as in Figure 4-4 back in Chapter
4. I also like to examine the individual monthly returns over time,
as shown in Figure 7-5, which gives the monthly returns for the
Donchian Trend system from 1996 to June 2006.
I ﬁnd that a graph like the one in Figure 7-5 gives a pretty good
indication of the relative pain versus reward one can expect and is
much more revealing than a single ﬁgure or set of ﬁgures.

Measuring Risk versus Reward
There are several uniﬁed risk/reward measures that are used commonly to compare systems and trading managers who employ systems for their futures trading funds. The most common of these are
the Sharpe ratio and the MAR ratio.

Monthly Returns
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

• 99 •

–10%
–20%

Ju
l1
99
6
Ja
n
19
97
Ju
l1
99
7
Ja
n
19
98
Ju
l1
99
8
Ja
n
19
99
Ju
l1
99
9
Ja
n
20
00
Ju
l2
00
0
Ja
n
20
01
Ju
l2
00
1
Ja
n
20
02
Ju
l2
00
2
Ja
n
20
03
Ju
l2
00
3
Ja
n
20
04
Ju
l2
00
4
Ja
n
20
05
Ju
l2
00
5
Ja
n
20
06

–30%

Losing Months

Figure 7-5

Winning Months

Donchian Trend Monthly Returns: January 1996 to June 2006

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

100 • Way of the Turtle

The Sharpe Ratio
The Sharpe ratio is probably the most common measure used by
pension funds and large investors in comparing potential investments. The Sharpe ratio was invented by the Nobel laureate
William F. Sharpe in 1966 as a measure for comparing the performance of mutual funds. This measure was introduced as a
reward-to-variability ratio but subsequently came to be referred to
simply as the Sharpe ratio after its originator.
The Sharpe ratio takes the differential return, which is the
CAGR% for the period being measured (i.e., a monthly or yearly
period subtracts what is known as the risk-free rate or the rate of interest one could get by investing in a risk-free bond such as a T-bill) and
then divides it by the standard deviation of the returns being measured (generally monthly or yearly). Keep in mind that the Sharpe
ratio was conceived as a measure for comparing the performance of
mutual funds, not as a comprehensive risk/reward measure. Mutual
funds are very speciﬁc types of investment vehicles that represent an
unleveraged investment in a portfolio of stocks.
The original role of the Sharpe ratio as a tool for comparing the
performance of mutual funds gives important clues to the types of
risks it does not contemplate. Mutual funds as they existed in 1966,
when the Sharpe ratio ﬁrst was proposed, were unleveraged investments in portfolios of U.S. stocks. Thus, a comparison between
mutual funds was one between investments in the same markets
and with the same basic investment style.
Further, at that time mutual funds held long-term investments
in portfolios of stocks. Not having a signiﬁcant timing or trading
component, they differed from each other only in their portfolio
selection and diversiﬁcation strategies. So, for the special case of

By What Measure? • 101

measuring mutual fund performance, the Sharpe ratio does a very
good job of representing that risk because it correctly notes that for
comparisons over the same period, the conﬁdence risk relates
directly to the variance in the returns. All else being equal, a mutual
fund with lower variance has less risk of having a return that deviates from the mean return it exhibited in the past.
Although the Sharpe ratio is an excellent measure of risk/reward
in comparing stock portfolio management strategies, it is not a sufﬁcient measure for comparing alternative investment funds such
as futures and commodities hedge funds. The Sharpe ratio falls
short here because alternative investment funds differ from unleveraged stock portfolios in several important areas that relate to risk:
• Management style risk: Futures systems and funds often use
short-term trading strategies that can differ greatly from the
practices of traditional investment funds that use a buy and
hold strategy. It is possible to lose money much more quickly
with a trading strategy that involves frequent buying and selling.
• Diversiﬁcation strategy risk: Many futures funds and
trading systems do not offer the same level of internal
diversiﬁcation that is found in traditional investments,
having a much larger percentage of assets in a small number
of instruments at any speciﬁc time.
• Exposure: Futures have higher leverage than stocks, and
this potentially exposes futures traders to more of the risk
inherent in market ﬂuctuations.
• Conﬁdence risk: Many futures fund managers do not have
extensive track records. With a limited track record there is

102 • Way of the Turtle

greater risk that an investor will see returns that fall short of
expectations.
Unfortunately, the use of the Sharpe ratio tends to exacerbate
one of the problems I see in the industry, especially among those
who do not understand trading and how it differs from traditional
buy-and-hold investment in stocks: The focus on smoothness of
returns as a proxy for risk.
Let me be clear as possible here: Smoothness does not equal risk!
Very risky investments can offer smooth returns for a limited period.
Investors tend to believe that an investment or manager who has
offered consistent positive returns over a period of several years is
a safe investment. They hold this belief often without understanding how those returns actually are made.
I believe that there is an inverse relationship between smoothness
of returns and actual risk in many instances. I offer two examples to
support this statement: One concerns a strategy that worked quite
well for several years and then stopped working altogether with spectacular results at Long-Term Capital Management; and the second
still is employed by many funds that have been delivering excellent
returns but have the potential for the same sort of blowup.

When Genius Failed
Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) used a strategy that
relied on very high leverage and the tendency for the price of ﬁxedincome bonds to converge in certain circumstances. Its use of very
high leverage caused its positions to become so large relative to the
rest of the market that it was very difﬁcult for LTCM to unload
those positions when it was faced with losses.

By What Measure? • 103

That strategy worked well for several years, but when a ﬁnancial
crisis caused by the Russian default on bonds triggered an adverse
price movement, its size worked against LTCM. This occurred
because the rest of the market knew that it could keep moving prices
against LTCM’s positions and that the ﬁrm eventually would have
to reverse those positions. LTCM ended up losing almost the entire
fund, which had been valued at $4.7 billion before the collapse.
Before the crisis, LTCM had averaged almost 40 percent annual
returns that were distributed very smoothly. In other words, before
that point it had an excellent Sharpe ratio. You can read more
about the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management in the book
When Genius Failed by Roger Lowenstein. (I liked the title so much
I was compelled to use it for the heading of this section.)

Not Too Sharp
A similar problem happened recently in natural gas trades at Amaranth, which also built up positions that were very large relative to
the rest of the market. Amaranth ended up losing about 65 percent
of its $9 billion fund in just two months. Before that it had an excellent Sharpe ratio.

A Brewing Storm?
Currently, there are many hedge funds that achieve returns by selling out of the money options, meaning that they are betting against
signiﬁcant price movement. This can be a very effective strategy that
offers particularly smooth returns if the risks are managed properly.
The problem with this approach is that it is difﬁcult for nonprofessionals to understand the actual risks incurred by the funds.
It is possible to generate very high and consistent returns by using

104 • Way of the Turtle

this strategy while having a very high exposure to any sort of price
shock. For example, anyone writing options against the eurodollar
in 1987 might have been wiped out. The loss from that price shock
combined with the exposure incurred by writing the options could
have been enough to result in a single-day loss greater than the
value of the fund.
Prudent managers can contain these risks. Unfortunately, many
investors ﬁnd out about these sorts of risks only after it is too late
and they have lost their entire investment. They are seduced by the
steady returns and multiyear track records of funds that have not
yet experienced a truly bad day.

The MAR Ratio
The MAR ratio is a measure that was devised by Managed
Accounts Reports, LLC, which reports on the performance of
hedge funds. The MAR ratio divides the annual return by the
largest drawdown, using month-end ﬁgures. This ratio serves as a
quick and dirty direct measure of risk/reward that I ﬁnd very useful
for ﬁltering out poorly performing strategies. It is very good for a
rough cut. The Donchian Trend system had a MAR ratio of 1.22
over the period tested above from January 1996 to June 2006, where
the CAGR% was 27.38 percent and the maximum drawdown using
month-end ﬁgures was 22.35 percent.
I ﬁnd the use of month-end ﬁgures to be a bit arbitrary and have
discovered that it often understates the true drawdown ﬁgures; so,
in my personal testing I use the maximum drawdown from the peak
day to the trough day without regard to where those days fall during the month. To give you some idea of how this might differ from
a measure that uses only month-end data, the actual maximum

By What Measure? • 105

drawdown, including days other than the end of a month, was 27.58
percent rather than 22.35 percent using only month-end ﬁgures.
The resulting MAR ratio is 0.99 rather than the original 1.22 using
only month-end ﬁgures.

System Death Risk Revisited
One of the most interesting observations I have made about trading systems, strategies, and performance is that those strategies
which historically appear to offer extremely good risk/reward ratios
tend to be the ones that are the most heavily imitated by the
broader trading community. Soon you end up with billions of dollars in trades chasing that strategy, and as a result, those strategies
can implode as they outgrow the liquidity of the markets in which
they are traded. They end up suffering from early system death.
Arbitrage strategies are perhaps the best example of this. An arbitrage in its purest form is an essentially risk-free trade. You buy
something in one place, sell it at another place, subtract the cost
of transportation or storage and pocket the difference. Most arbitrage strategies are not quite that risk-free, but many come close.
The problem is that these strategies make money only when there
is a spread between the prices at different locations or between the
price of one instrument and that of a similar instrument.
The more traders implement a particular strategy, the more the
spread will drop as those traders start to compete for essentially the
same trades. This effect kills off the strategy over time as it becomes
less and less proﬁtable.
Conversely, systems and strategies that do not appeal to the typical investor tend to have much longer lifetimes. Trend following

106 • Way of the Turtle

is a good example. Most large investors are uncomfortable with the
large drawdowns and equity ﬂuctuations that are common to trendfollowing strategies. For this reason, trend following continues to
work over a long period of time.
Returns tend to be cyclical however. Every time there is a huge
new inﬂux of capital after a period of relatively sedate returns, there
is generally a period of a few relatively tough years since the market cannot easily digest the amount of new money from investors
who are using the same strategies in the same markets. This is generally followed by a period of good returns as investors withdraw
their money from trend following funds after periods of relatively
poor performance.
Be careful what you look for: If you get too greedy when examining a strategy, you are going to increase the chances that you will
not get the results you seek. Strategies that seem to be the best in
retrospect are also those most likely to attract new investors and as
a consequence often start performing poorly soon after the new
investments take place.

Everybody’s Different
Each of us has a different tolerance for pain and different expectations for reward. For this reason, there is no single measure that
universally appeals to everyone. I have used a combination of the
MAR ratio, drawdowns, and overall return while keeping an eye on
smoothness by looking at the Sharpe ratio and R-squared ﬁgures.
Recently I designed some measures that are more stable versions
of these common measures. Those measures are discussed in
Chapter 12.

By What Measure? • 107

I also try not to get too caught up in any particular ﬁgures, knowing that the future will be different and that the fact that a strategy
has a MAR of 1.5 at the moment does not mean it will continue to
maintain that ratio in the future.

This page intentionally left blank

eight
RISK AND MONEY
MANAGEMENT
Ruin is the risk you should be concerned with the most.
It can come like a thief in the night and steal everything
if you aren’t watching carefully.

ike many of the concepts we use in trading, expectation, edge,
risk of ruin and so on, the term money management comes
from gambling theory. Money management is the art of keeping
your risk of ruin at an acceptable level while maximizing your
proﬁt potential by choosing an appropriate number of shares or
contracts to trade, something we refer to as the size of the trade,
and by limiting the aggregate size of the position to control exposure to price shocks. Good money management helps ensure that
you will continue to be able to trade through the inevitable bad
periods that every trader experiences. Most discussions of the topic
make use of countless formulas and cover different methods for
determining precisely the number of contracts one should trade.
They approach risk as if it were a deﬁnable and knowable concept,
but it isn’t. This chapter won’t duplicate those discussions. If you

L

• 109 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

110 • Way of the Turtle

want a survey of the many different methods you can use to determine the number of contracts to trade, several books listed in the
bibliography cover that topic.
I believe that money management is more art than science, or
perhaps more like religion than art. There are no right answers.
There are no best ways to deﬁne one’s risk position. There are only
individual answers that work for each person; those answers can be
obtained only by asking the right questions.
At its core, money management is about ﬁnding the trade-off
between taking so much risk that you end up losing everything or
are forced to quit trading and, conversely, taking so little risk that
you end up leaving too much money on the table. There are two
primary ways that excessive risk can force you to stop trading:
extended drawdowns that exceed your psychological limits and a
sudden price shock that wipes out the account.
Your proper level of risk is very much a function of what is important to you. For that reason, if you want to trade, you have to become
intimately familiar with the implications of taking too much risk or
too little risk so that you can make an informed decision.
Many vendors of systems or courses on trading make it seem that
anyone can follow their methods and achieve riches quickly and
easily. They do this because it helps them sell more systems and
more courses on trading. They understate the dangers of risk and
overstate the probabilities and ease of attaining those riches.
They are lying. The risk is real, and trading is not easy.
It is very important to keep one thing in mind before deciding
to be aggressive: Steady returns of 20 or 30 percent per year will
make you a lot of money in a reasonably short period starting with
almost any amount of money. The power of compounding is very

Risk and Money Management • 111

strong, but only if you don’t lose everything and have to start over
again. If you begin with $50,000, you will have almost $10 million
after 20 years—if you can earn 30 percent returns.
Trying to go for very aggressive returns of 100 percent or 200 percent per year greatly increases the chances that you will blow up
and have to stop trading. I highly recommend taking a conservative approach for the ﬁrst several years of trading.
Consider what would have happened if you had been trading
with the Donchian Trend system in 1987 at aggressive levels. Figure 8-1 shows the drawdowns that are encountered as the risk levels increase.
Note how the graph rises steadily and levels off at the 100 percent point. This means that if you were trading aggressively and
risking 3 percent of your trading capital on each trade, you
would have gone bust overnight because this drawdown is due
entirely to that single day when the interest-rate markets
reversed precipitously.
For most people, a prudent way to trade would be at a level that
demonstrates a drawdown, using historical simulations, that is at
most one-half the level you believe you can tolerate. This will provide a buffer in case the system has a drawdown that is larger than
what previously had been seen during testing. It also will make it
less likely that an unexpected price shock will cause you to lose all
your trading capital.

Don’t Believe Everything You Hear
Many people have touted money management as a magical elixir
that can cure all that ails your trading. Others have devised com-

Max Drawdown as Risk Per Trade (%) Varies
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%

• 112 •

40%
30%
20%
10%

1.
0%
1.
1%
1.
2%
1.
3%
1.
4%
1.
5%
1.
6%
1.
7%
1.
8%
1.
9%
2.
0%
2.
1%
2.
2%
2.
3%
2.
4%
2.
5%
2.
6%
2.
7%
2.
8%
2.
9%
3.
0%
3.
1%
3.
2%
3.
3%
3.
4%
3.
5%
3.
6%
3.
7%
3.
8%
3.
9%
4.
0%

0%

Risk Per Trade (%)

Figure 8-1

Drawdown versus Risk

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Risk and Money Management • 113

plex formulas and written entire books about money management.
It shouldn’t be that complicated.
Proper money management is quite simple. For a trading
account of a particular size, you can safely buy a certain number
of contracts in each futures market. For some markets and for
smaller accounts this amount may be zero.
For example, the natural gas (NYMEX symbol NG) contract earlier this year had an ATR that represented more than $7,500 per contract. Remember, this means that the value of the contract ﬂuctuated
$7,500 on the average each day. Thus, for a system that used a 2-ATR
stop such as the Donchian Trend system, a single trade could mean
a loss of $15,000. If you were trading an account as large as $50,000,
this would represent 30 percent of the account. Most people would
say that risking 30 percent of your trading account on one trade is a
really bad idea. Therefore, a prudent number of contracts of NG to
trade would be zero for an account of $50,000. Even for an account
as large as $1 million, such a trade would represent a 1.5 percent risk
level, which many would consider fairly aggressive.
Trading with too much risk is probably the single most common
reason for failure among new traders. Often novices trade so aggressively that a small string of losses will wipe out their trading capital.
New traders often misunderstand the dangers of leverage, and
because their broker and the exchange permits them to buy and sell
large contracts with as little as $20,000, they often do precisely that.

Risk of Ruin Revisited
Earlier we discussed the concept of risk of ruin: The possibility of
losing so much capital as a result of a string of losses that one is

114 • Way of the Turtle

forced to quit trading. The deﬁnition as most people use it applies
to a random set of outcomes using a fairly simplistic formula based
on probability theory. Most people think in terms of the risk that
you will experience ruin due to a bad period of losses in rapid
succession. I believe that this is not generally what brings traders
to ruin. Traders do not fall prey to a period of randomly adverse
market behavior very often. It is far more likely that they have made
some serious mistakes in their analysis.
Here is what I believe accounts for a trader’s lack of success in
trading commodities:
• No plan: Many traders base their trades on hunches, rumor,
guesses, and the belief that they know something about the
future direction of prices.
• Too much risk: Many otherwise excellent traders have been
ruined because they incurred too much risk. I’m not talking
about 50 percent or 100 percent more risk than is prudent. I
have seen traders who trade at a level that is 5 or 10 times
more than I consider prudent even for aggressive trading.
• Unrealistic expectations: Many new traders trade with too
much risk because they have unrealistic expectations about
how much they can earn and what sorts of returns they can
achieve. This is often also the reason new traders believe
they can start trading on the basis of fundamental data; they
believe they are smart enough to “beat” the market with
little or no training and very little information.
When I started working with futures trading systems in high
school, I noticed something rather odd: A very high percentage of

Risk and Money Management • 115

our customers were doctors and dentists. At the time, I believed
that doctors and dentists were attracted to trading because they had
good incomes and could afford to risk money in futures markets.
Looking back on it, I can see that was only a partial answer. I now
believe that the real reason doctors and dentists are drawn in disproportionate numbers to commodities trading is that they have a
lot of conﬁdence in their intelligence and ability to translate their
success in their work to success in another industry—perhaps too
much conﬁdence in this particular instance.
A doctor, for example, is invariably quite smart. You can’t
become a doctor without attending a good university, passing difﬁcult tests, and getting good grades. Further, anyone who has graduated from medical school has achieved a level of success that
many aspire to but only a few attain. It must be quite natural for
someone who is smart and has been successful in his ﬁrst endeavors to believe that he can be successful at trading as well.
At the same time, many doctors and dentists expect to be successful traders immediately. Trading appears to be so simple that
they believe that this should be possible. However, I found that a
large percentage of them were not successful as traders because
they did not have realistic expectations. Success in one sphere of
business does not guarantee success in trading.
They did not realize that although trading is simple for the reasons
I outlined in the early part of the book, it is not easy. It takes a lot of
time and study before one realizes just how simple trading is, but it
takes many years of failure before most traders come to grips with how
hard it can be to keep things simple and not lose sight of the basics.
Consider the Turtles. We were taught the same methods and
taught in only two weeks, yet some of us did not make any money

116 • Way of the Turtle

at all. There was lots of positive reinforcement to do the right thing
since we could hear the other Turtles phoning in orders, yet some
of us did not follow the methods we were taught.

Turtle Money Management
Means Staying in the Game
The primary goal of trading should be to stay in the game. Time is
on your side. A system or method with positive expectation eventually will make you rich, sometimes beyond your wildest dreams.
This can happen only if you can continue trading. For traders,
death comes in two forms: a slow painful death that causes traders
to stop out of anguish and frustration and a spectacular rapid death
we refer to as a blowup.
Most new traders overestimate their tolerance for pain, believing that they can live through a 30 percent or 40 percent—or
perhaps even a 50 percent or 70 percent—drawdown when they
can’t. This can have an extremely adverse effect on their trading
because it usually results in their stopping completely or changing
methods at the worst possible time: After they have incurred a drawdown and suffered signiﬁcant losses.
The uncertainty of the future is what makes trading so difﬁcult,
and people do not like uncertainty. Unfortunately, the reality is that
the markets are unpredictable and the best you can hope for is a
method that generally works over a relatively long period. For this
reason, your trading methods should be designed as much as possible to reduce the uncertainty you can expect to encounter when
trading. The markets are already uncertain enough; there is no sense
adding to that variability with poor money management practices.

Risk and Money Management • 117

Since the Turtle Way is not to predict which markets will trend
and which trades will be successful, as Turtles we approached each
trade with the same expectation and commitment. To the extent
possible, that meant risking the same amount of capital in each
market. Implementing money management according to the Turtle Way increases the likelihood that you will achieve consistent
returns because our approach adjusts for the relative volatility and
risk between markets.
Oversimpliﬁed strategies such as trading one contract per market
and methods that do not normalize for volatility can cause trades in
certain markets to overshadow those in other markets. So, even a
large gain in one market may not compensate for a small loss in
another market if the losing market has a much larger contract.
Although many traders intuitively know this is true, many still
use fairly simplistic mechanisms for deciding how many contracts
to trade in any speciﬁc market. For example, they may trade one
contract of S&P 500 futures per $20,000 in the trading account.
They may have used this same formula for the last 10 years, during
which time that market’s volatility has ﬂuctuated greatly. These
rule-of-thumb approaches can increase the variability of returns
unnecessarily.

The N Factor
As was mentioned earlier, Rich and Bill used an innovative method
for determining the position size for each market on the basis of
the amount that market moved up and down each day in constant
dollar terms. They determined the number of contracts for each
market that would cause them all to move up and down approxi-

118 • Way of the Turtle

mately the same amount in dollar terms. Since the number of contracts we traded for each market was adjusted for this volatility
measure, N, the daily ﬂuctuations for any particular trade tended
to be similar.
Some traders prefer to measure risk in terms of the distance
between the price at which one will exit a trade and the price at
which that trade was entered. That is only one way of considering
risk. In October 1987, it did not matter where our stops had been.
The market gapped through our stops overnight.
If I had been using a method that relied only on the distance
between entry and stops, I would have lost four times as much as
the typical Turtle on that day because I used a stop that was onequarter the size. I used a 1⁄2-ATR stop, whereas most Turtles used a
2-ATR stop. Thus, if I had been using a method that sized purely
on the distance to the stop, my calculations would have resulted in
a position that was four times larger than that of the typical Turtle.
Fortunately, Rich used volatility-based position sizing as a way
to manage risk, and so I had the same position sizes relative to my
account as did the other Turtles, and our exposure to the price
shock was the same. I am certain that this method was not accidental. Surely Rich and Bill both recalled experiencing prior price
shocks when they determined how to limit the Turtles’ maximum
allowable risk levels.
One of the smartest things Rich and Bill did when they gave us
our trading rules was to impose overall risk limits on us. This had
important implications for our drawdowns and particularly for our
exposure to price shocks. As was mentioned earlier, we put our
positions in chunks we called units. Each unit was sized by determining the number of contracts where 1-ATR of price movement

Risk and Money Management • 119

would be equal to 1 percent of our account size. For a $1 million
trading account, this was $10,000. So, we would look at the dollar
amount represented by 1-ATR of price movement in that particular market and then divide $10,000 by that number to determine
the number of contracts we could trade for every $1 million in trading capital that Rich had allocated to us. We referred to these numbers as the unit size. Markets that were volatile or had larger
contracts had smaller unit sizes than did markets that were smaller
or less volatile.
Rich and Bill no doubt had noticed some things that anyone
who has traded for a period of time is aware of: Many markets are
highly correlated, and at the end of a large trend when the bad days
come, it seems that everything moves against you at once; even
markets that normally do not seem correlated become so on those
volatile days when a large trend disintegrates.
Recall the October 1987 overnight price shock. Almost every
market we were in moved against us signiﬁcantly that day. To
counter that effect, Rich and Bill imposed some limits on our trading: First, we could put on a maximum of only 4 units per market;
second, we could put on a maximum of only 6 units in markets that
were highly correlated; third, we could put on a maximum of only
10 units in any given direction (i.e., 10 long or 10 short). That number could be raised to 12 if there were positions in uncorrelated
markets. These limits probably saved Rich more than $100 million that day. If they had not been in place, our losses would have
been staggering.
I often have seen people claim to have tested the historical performance of the Turtle system and state that those methods did not
work well or were not proﬁtable. They would make statements

120 • Way of the Turtle

such as: “I implemented every rule except the unit limits.” The unit
limits were an integral and extremely important part of our system
because they served as a mechanism for ﬁltering out trades in lagging markets.
Interest-rate futures provide a good example. We traded four different interest-rate markets as Turtles: eurodollars, U.S. Treasury
bonds, 90-day Treasury bills, and two-year Treasury notes. During
a move of any reasonable duration there would be entry signals in
all four markets. We generally would hold positions in only two of
them at any speciﬁc time: The ﬁrst two that had signaled.
The same thing generally held for foreign currency futures. We
traded the French franc, the British pound, the German mark, the
Swiss franc, the Canadian dollar, and the Japanese yen. However,
at any given time we typically would have a position in only two or
perhaps three of those markets.
For this reason, having unit limits kept us out of a lot of losing
trades. The markets that signaled last often did not move nearly as
far and were more likely to result in losses.

Rules for Estimating Risk
One of the best ways to determine the risk a particular system may
represent or the risk inherent in holding a position is to look at the
major price shocks that have occurred over the last 30 to 50 years.
If you look at those catastrophic days and consider what would have
happened to a set of likely positions, you can determine what
amount of risk would have resulted in a 50 percent drawdown or
the amount it would have taken to go completely bust. Using computer simulation software, it is easy to see what positions you would

Risk and Money Management • 121

have held on those days and what sort of drawdowns are represented by those positions.
Now consider what would happen if something even worse had
occurred. It may be unpleasant to think about such things, but they
can happen, and you need to plan for them. What would have happened to your positions if instead of their attack on the World Trade
Center, al-Qaeda had detonated a nuclear bomb somewhere else
in Manhattan? What would have happened if a disaster of equal
magnitude had taken place in Tokyo, London, or Frankfurt?
Anyone trading aggressively will be much more likely to lose
everything in the event of a disaster of unprecedented scale. This is
something to keep in mind as you hear the siren call of 100 percentplus returns.

This page intentionally left blank

nine
TURTLE-STYLE
BUILDING BLOCKS
Don’t spend all your time admiring the fancy tools
in the magazines. First learn how to use the basic ones well.
It’s not the size of your tools that counts but how well you use them.

hapter 2 provided an overview of the various market states: stable and quiet, stable and volatile, trending and quiet, and
trending and volatile. I also pointed out the importance of being
able to identify the state of the market you are trading in since
many systems are designed to keep you out of that market when it’s
in a state that is not favorable given their trading styles.
I refer to the tools that indicate market states as building blocks.
Some building blocks have speciﬁc names such as indicators, oscillators, and ratios, but I group them all into the more general category. This chapter focuses on the building blocks for trend-following
systems. These are tools that indicate when the market may have
moved from a stable state to a trending state and, conversely, when
it has moved back to a stable state. Simply put, they indicate when
a trend may have started and when it may have ended.

C

• 123 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

124 • Way of the Turtle

Unfortunately for traders, there are no building blocks that work
all the time, no secret formulas that lead to an easy fortune. The best
we can do is ﬁnd tools that help us identify times when the odds that
a trend has started or ended have improved. This is sufﬁcient for our
purposes since it is possible to make good returns even when the odds
are only slightly in your favor (ask your favorite casino owner).

One Brick at a Time
Let’s begin with a survey of many common trend-following building blocks, including the ones we were taught in the Turtle program. These are ways to determine when a trend may be starting
and when it may have ended. This is not a complete survey: You
can ﬁnd entire books that do nothing more than outline different
indicators and system rules that can be used to build trend-following systems. For other types of trading there are other types of building blocks that may be useful. Since this book is not a
comprehensive treatise, however, I’ll leave the discovery of those
tools as an exercise for the reader. The building blocks discussed in
this chapter are the following:
• Breakouts: These are situations when the price exceeds the
highest high or the lowest low for a speciﬁc number of days.
This was the primary tool used in the original Turtle system.
• Moving averages: These are continuously calculated
averages of the price for a speciﬁc number of days. They are
called moving averages because they are calculated each
day and their value therefore moves up and down with the
new prices.

Turtle-Style Building Blocks • 125

• Volatility channels: These are built by adding a speciﬁc
amount of price to a moving average that is based on a
measure of market volatility such as the standard deviation
or ATR.
• Time-based exits: These are the simplest possible exits: You
exit the market at a speciﬁc, predetermined time (e.g., exit
the market after 10 days or after 80 days).
• Simple lookbacks: These involve a comparison of the
current price with a historical price at some earlier period.
We will explore each building block in more detail and demonstrate how it can be used in a trend-following system.

Breakouts
Earlier in the book I discussed breakouts and showed how they
have an edge. A new high price is a strong indicator of the possibility that a trend is beginning. The number of days used to calculate the highest high or the lowest low for the breakout will
determine the type of trend you may be entering. Fewer days will
indicate the possibility of a shorter-term trend. A large number of
days will be more indicative of the possibility of a longer-term trend.
Breakouts work especially well when they are combined with other
indicators of overall trend, such as the Donchian Trend system,
which uses breakouts for both entry signals and exit signals and
moving averages to indicate the overall trend.

Moving Averages
Moving averages are continuously calculated averages of the price
for a speciﬁc number of days. The simplest type of moving average,

126 • Way of the Turtle

SB: Sugar #11 World-CSCE
14.0

13.5

13.0

12.5

12.0

11.5

11.0

10.5

Figure 9-1

05

05

20
ov
N

ct
O

Se

p

20

20

05

05
20
A

ug

20
l
Ju

Ju

n

20

05

05

10.0

20-Day and 70-Day Exponential Moving Averages

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

called a simple moving average, is the average of the price for a speciﬁed number of days. The 10-day moving average of the close is the
average of the prior 10 days’ closes, and a 70-day moving average
of the high is the average of the previous 70 highs.
There are other kinds of moving averages that are slightly more
complex, the most common being the exponential moving average.
This is an average that is computed by taking a portion of the previous day’s average and mixing it with a portion of the current price.
Figure 9-1 presents two moving averages: a 20-day exponential
moving average and a 70-day exponential moving average.
You can see how the 20-day moving average follows the price
more closely and how it crosses the longer-term moving average in
mid-June, indicating the start of an up trend. This is a very com-

Turtle-Style Building Blocks • 127

mon system entry: A trade is taken in the direction of the shorter
moving average when it crosses over the longer moving average. In
this case, a long trade would have been initiated in early June at
the point of the crossover.
Many other different types of moving averages have been proposed by system designers and researchers. Most of the additional
complexity offered by their designers is not all that useful in actual
practice and presents a greater potential for curve ﬁtting and unrealistic test results. This potential pitfall is considered in greater
detail in Chapter 11.

Volatility Channels
Volatility channels are good indicators of the beginning of a trend.
If the price exceeds a particular moving average plus some additional amount, this means that the price is going up. In other words,
it indicates that a trend possibly has begun. We will examine two
different systems built on volatility channels in Chapter 10.
Figure 9-2 shows an 80-day moving average with a volatility
channel plotted both above and below the moving average. You
can see from the graph that the prices remain inside the channel for the most part except in the right-hand part of the graph,
when they descend below the channel. You also can see how the
moving average slowly turns down and follows the prices as they
go lower.

Time-Based Exits
A simple time-based exit can be very effective and useful. It also
can help smooth out the drawdowns associated with a breakdown
in a trend. This is the case because very often a time-based exit

128 • Way of the Turtle

SB: Sugar #11 World-CSCE
12.00

11.75

11.50

11.25

11.00

10.75

10.50

10.25

Figure 9-2

05

05

20
n
Ju

ay
M

pr
A

ar
M

20

05
20

05
20

05
20
Fe

b

20
n
Ja

D

ec

20

05

04

10.00

Moving Average with Volatility Channel

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

occurs before the drawdown is revealed by a moving average or
breakout, both of which follow price more closely.

Simple Lookbacks
If you consider at a very basic level what trend following is, you can
devise even simpler mechanisms for determining the potential start
of a trend. One method that works reasonably well is to simply look
at a price some number of days earlier. You can add those prices
by using a volatility-based measure such as ATR. For example, you
can buy if the prices exceed the price 100 days ago by 2 ATR.
Chapter 10 will explore some systems that use other types of simple lookbacks.

Turtle-Style Building Blocks • 129

Want More?
Over the years, hundreds of different types of indicators have been
invented. Recently, advances in technology have made it easier for
traders to program their own formulas and create their own indicators, and trading magazines publish new indicators and systems
built on those indicators in each new issue. For those who want to
learn about other indicators and system building blocks in more
detail, some sources are included in the bibliography. However,
before you dig in too deeply, here are some words of advice. I’ll use
trend following as an example, but this advice applies to other types
of trading as well.
If a market starts to go up, sooner or later it will trigger a long
entry signal using any of the trend-following building blocks. All
the building blocks can be tuned so that they react more quickly
or more slowly. Therefore, in effect you can use any of them to
build systems that will perform similarly to systems built with other
building blocks.
My advice is that there are better ways to spend your time than
searching for the perfect newfangled nuclear-powered indicator
that works perfectly in past years’ markets. I suggest that instead you
try out some simple systems that use the basic building blocks that
were outlined above. We will look at some of them in Chapter 10.

This page intentionally left blank

ten
TURTLE-STYLE TRADING:
STEP BY STEP
Keep it simple. Simple time-tested methods that are
well executed will beat fancy complicated methods every time.

his chapter will look at some Turtle-style trading systems, more
commonly known as long-term trend-following systems. Those
systems are as follows:

T

• ATR Channel Breakout: A volatility channel system that
uses ATR as the volatility measure.
• Bollinger Breakout: A volatility channel system that uses
the standard deviation as the volatility measure.
• Donchian Trend: A breakout system with a trend ﬁlter.
• Donchian Trend with Time Exit: A breakout system with a
trend ﬁlter and a time-based exit.
• Dual Moving Average: A system that buys and sells when a
faster moving average crosses over a slower moving average.
Unlike the other systems, this system is always in the market,
either long or short.
• 131 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

132 • Way of the Turtle

• Triple Moving Average: A system that buys and sells when a
faster moving average crosses over a slower moving average
but only in the direction of the major trend deﬁned by a
very slow-moving average.
To examine the differences among these systems, I ran a series
of historical simulations to determine how much money one would
have made if one had used each of those systems for the last ten
years. This chapter will use some of the metrics discussed in Chapter 7 to compare the relative performance of each of the systems.

To Test or Not to Test
There are many traders, including quite a few successful ones, who do
not believe in historical testing, sometimes referred to as backtesting.
They believe that testing with historical data is not useful because the
past will not repeat itself. For readers who are not familiar with this
debate, I am going to spend several paragraphs convincing you of
something that you probably think needs no explanation. To those who
do not believe in historical testing, my question is: What is the alternative? How do you arrive at any strategy without knowledge of the
past? How do you determine when to buy or sell? Do you guess?
The only information you have is what the markets have done
so far. Even if you are a discretionary trader who does not use rules
or systems, you still have your personal experience of historical
price action as a guide. You are relying on your interpretation of
the past; in effect you are relying on historical data.
Smart discretionary traders can develop systems after years of
experience in trading. They note repeating patterns that offer

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 133

opportunities for proﬁts. They then trade by using ideas designed
to capitalize on those opportunities. New traders often pore over
charts for months before starting to trade so that they can understand what the market did in the past. They do this because they
know that the best indication of what the markets are likely to do
in the future is contained in the past.
It is not hard to argue that computers can test ideas more reliably using the same historical data. Computer simulation enables
traders to perform a more rigorous analysis of a particular strategy
before trading begins. Then the traders often ﬁnd that ideas that
appeared promising will not work because of something that was
not anticipated. It is much better to ﬁgure this out by computer
than with an actual account.
The reason some traders do not believe in historical simulation
is that there are many ways to distort backtesting. It is easy to use
the power of a computer to ﬁnd methods that appear to work but
will not work in real markets. These problems are tractable if you
make sure to avoid the most common pitfall: Overoptimization.
This topic is covered in Chapter 11.
Proper historical testing requires some experience and skills that
beginning traders do not possess. However, the fact that you would
not give a sharp knife to a small child does not mean you don’t want
to use one in the kitchen when you are cooking. You just need to
be careful with sharp instruments.
A historical simulation does not predict what you will encounter
in future trading, but it will give you a way to determine whether
an approach is likely to be proﬁtable in the future. It is not the optimal solution—a crystal ball or time machine would be better—but
it is the best tool that is currently available.

134 • Way of the Turtle

The Myth of the Expert
The “don’t optimize” counsel is an effect of what my friends and
I like to call the myth of the expert. Unfortunately, in most ﬁelds the
number of people who really understand what’s going on is very
limited. For every true expert, there are scores of pseudo-experts
who are able to perform in the ﬁeld, have assembled loads of knowledge, and in the eyes of those who are not experts are indistinguishable from the true experts. These pseudo-experts can function but
do not really understand the area in which they claim expertise.
True experts do not have rigid rules; they understand what’s
going on, and so they do not need rigid rules.
Pseudo-experts, however, don’t understand, and so they tend to
look at what the experts are doing and copy it. They know what to
do but not why it should be done. Therefore, they listen to the true
experts and create rigid rules where none were intended.
One sure sign of a pseudo-expert is writing that is unclear and
difﬁcult to follow. Unclear writing comes from unclear thinking.
A true expert will be able to explain complicated ideas in ways that
are clear and easy to understand.
Another common characteristic of pseudo-experts is that
they know how to apply complex processes and techniques and
have been well trained but do not understand the limits of those
techniques.
In trading, a good example would be someone who can perform
complex statistical analyses of trades, runs a simulation that generates 1,000 trades, and then assumes that she can draw conclusions
from those trades without regard for the fact that they might have
been drawn from only two weeks of short-term data. These people

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 135

can do the math but do not understand that the math does not
matter if next week is radically different from the last two weeks.
Don’t confuse experience with expertise or knowledge with
wisdom.

Common Building Blocks
The testing described in this chapter was performed using a common portfolio of markets and a common money management algorithm to keep the differences in results isolated to those effects
which are due to changes in the rules of the system. Here are the
variables used in the testing discussed in this chapter.

Markets
The markets in the testing portfolio include the Australian dollar,
the British pound, corn, cocoa, the Canadian dollar, crude oil, cotton, the euro, the eurodollar, feeder cattle, gold, copper, heating oil,
unleaded gas, the Japanese yen, coffee, cattle, hogs, the Mexican
peso, natural gas, soybeans, sugar, the Swiss franc, silver, Treasury
notes, Treasury bonds, and wheat.
These markets were selected from the liquid (high-tradingvolume) U.S. markets. A few liquid markets were eliminated
because they were very highly correlated with other, more liquid
markets. We decided to limit our testing for these purposes to U.S.
markets because many of the providers of historical data sell the
information for foreign markets separately. For that reason, many
new traders start with the U.S. markets only, and we wanted to
make it as easy as possible for traders to duplicate our results in their
own testing.

136 • Way of the Turtle

Money Management
The money management algorithm used here was the same as that
used by the Turtles except that we employed a ﬁgure that was half
as aggressive. Instead of equating 1 ATR to 1 percent of our trading equity, we equated it to 0.5 percent. To arrive at number of contracts for the test, we divided 0.5 percent of the equity by the value
of a given market’s ATR in terms of dollars at the point when the
orders were entered for a speciﬁc trade.

Test Dates
The testing was performed using data from January 1996 through
June 2006 for all the systems.

The Systems
Let’s examine each system in greater detail before revealing the
testing results.

ATR Channel Breakout
The ATR Channel Breakout system is a volatility channel system
that uses the average true range as the volatility measure. The channel is formed by adding 7 ATR to a 350-day moving average of the
closing prices for the channel top and subtracting 3 ATR from the
moving average for the channel bottom. A long trade is entered on
the open if the previous day’s close exceeded the top of the channel; a short trade is entered if the previous day’s close fell below the
bottom of the channel. Trades are exited when the close crosses
back through the moving average price.
A variation of the ATR Channel Breakout system was popularized as the PGO (Pretty Good Oscillator) system by the trader Mark

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 137

FC: Cattle-Feeder-CME
117.5

115.0

112.5

110.0

107.5

105.0

102.5

100.0

97.5

Figure 10-1

6
20
0
Ju

n

20
ay
M

A

pr

20

06

06

6
00
M
ar
2

Fe

b

20

06

95.0

ATR Channel Breakout System

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Johnson on Chuck LeBeau’s System Trader’s Club (www.
traderclub.com) forum. It is also a variant of the Bollinger Breakout system discussed below. Figure 10-1 shows a graph of the
volatility channel for the ATR Channel Breakout system.
The middle line is the 350-day moving average, and the top line
is the top of the volatility channel formed by adding 7 ATR to the
moving average.

Bollinger Breakout
This system was described by Chuck LeBeau and David Lucas in
their 1992 book Technical Traders Guide to Computer Analysis of

138 • Way of the Turtle

the Futures Markets (using different numbers for the days in the
moving average and the standard deviations for the channel width).
A Bollinger band is a volatility channel that was invented by John
Bollinger. The Bollinger band for this system is formed by adding
and subtracting 2.5 standard deviations of the close to a 350-day
moving average. A long trade is entered on the open if the previous day’s close exceeded the top of the channel; a short trade is
entered if the previous day’s close fell below the bottom of the channel. Trades are exited when the close crosses back through the moving average price. Figure 10-2 shows a graph of the volatility
channel for the Bollinger Breakout system.
SI: Silver-COMEX
1500

1400

1300

1200

1100

1000

900

800

Figure 10-2

06

6

Bollinger Breakout System

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

A

pr

20

00
ar
2
M

Fe

b

20

06

20
06
Ja

n

20
D

ec

20

05

05

700

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 139

Donchian Trend
This Donchian Trend system, which was described in Chapter 5, is
a simpliﬁed version of the system we used as Turtles. It uses a 20-day
breakout for entry and a 10-day breakout for exits and includes a 350day/25-day exponential moving average trend ﬁlter. Trades are taken
only in the direction indicated by the faster moving average. If the
25-day moving average is above the 350-day average, only longs may
be taken; if the 25-day moving average is below the 350-day average,
only shorts may be taken. The system also uses a 2-ATR stop just as
the original Turtle system did. Figure 10-3 shows the breakout levels
and moving averages for the Donchian Trend system.

CD: FX-Canadian Dollar-CME
0.76

0.74

0.72

0.70

0.68

0.66

Figure 10-3

Donchian Trend System

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

00
3
l2
Ju

Ju

n

20
03

20
03
ay
M

pr
A

M

ar

20

20
03

03

0.64

140 • Way of the Turtle

The smooth line that follows the prices fairly closely is the short
moving average; the lower smooth line at the bottom is the long
moving average. The graph indicates that a long-trend is in
progress, and so only long trades will be taken. The jagged lines at
the top and bottom of the prices are the breakout levels. The highest high moves directly as a new high is made, and so it closely follows the price on the way up. Note that the lowest low does not
follow the price as closely as the price moves up.
The chart shows that a long trade would have been entered on
April 10 as the price penetrated the former highest high at 0.6802,
which had been made on March 7. Note too how a previous
attempt to exceed that price at the end of March was unsuccessful. This is a good example of resistance indicating selling. The
second time the price rose to that level, it was able to break
through and rally 6 cents to 0.74 without any signiﬁcant pullbacks.
The price was able to rise because there were no more traders willing to sell at that level but there were buyers willing to buy at the
higher prices.

Donchian Trend with Time Exit
A variation on the Donchian Trend system, the Donchian Trend
with Time Exit system, uses a time-based exit instead of a breakout
exit. It exits the trade after 80 days and does not use any stops whatsoever. There are many traders who state that entries do not matter; only exits do. This system is my response to that statement.
When we compare the performance of this system with that of the
other systems, you will be able to see how this very simple exit compares with more sophisticated exits.

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 141

Dual Moving Average
This is a very simple system that buys and sells when a 100-day
moving average crosses over a slower 350-day moving average.
Unlike the other systems, this system is always in the market, either
long or short. The only time a trade is exited is when the fast-moving average crosses over, at which time the trade is exited and a new
trade is initiated in the opposite direction. Figure 10-4 shows the
moving averages for the Dual Moving Average system.
The 100-day moving average more closely follows the price, and
when it crosses it at the end of July, a long trade will be entered. As
you probably can tell, this system is a very long term trend-following

SB: Sugar #11 World-CSCE
15.5

15.0
14.5
14.0
13.5
13.0
12.5
12.0
11.5

Figure 10-4

05

05

Dual Moving Average System

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

20
ec
D

ov
N

ct
O

20

20
05

05
20
Se
p

20
05
A
ug

Ju

l2

00
5

11.0

142 • Way of the Turtle

system and does not trade all that often compared with most other
systems.

Triple Moving Average
This system uses three moving averages: a 150-day average, a 250day average, and a 350-day average. The buys and sells occur
when the 150-day moving average crosses over a slower 250-day
moving average. The system uses the longer 350-day average as a
trend ﬁlter. Trades happen only when both moving averages are
on the same side as the longer 350-day average. If both are higher,
long trades are permitted; if both are lower, only short trades are
permitted.
Unlike the Dual Moving Average system, this system is not
always in the market. Trades are exited when the 150-day average
crosses the 250-day average. Figure 10-5 illustrates the moving averages for the Triple Moving Average system.
The top line is the 150-day average, the middle line is the 250day average, and the lower line is the 350-day average. You can see
how all three lines slowly follow the price upward on this chart,
which uses the same time period as the one in Figure 10-4. The
system will exit the trade when the top line crosses back under the
middle line.
Before we move on to the next section, guess what the relative
performance of these systems for the period indicated will be. How
much worse will the time-based exit be than the normal breakout
exit? Which two systems do you guess will have the best MAR ratio?
How much better will the Triple Moving Average system perform
than the Dual Moving Average system?

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 143

SB: Sugar #11 World-CSCE
16.0
15.5
15.0
14.5
14.0
13.5
13.0
12.5
12.0
11.5

05
20

05

ec
D

ov
N

ct
O

p
Se

20

20

05
20

05
20
ug
A

Figure 10-5

05

11.0

Triple Moving Average System

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

The Results Are In
I tested all six systems with the same test data—money management, portfolio, and test start and stop dates—using our trading simulation software, Trading Blox Builder. The software ran a
simulation for each of the systems from January 1996 through June
2006. It simulated every trade and generated performance statistics
for each of the systems. Table 10-1 shows some of the most common performance metrics for each of the six systems.

144 • Way of the Turtle

Table 10-1

Historical System Performance Comparison

System

CAGR%

MAR

Sharpe Trades W%

Max
DD

DD
Length

ATR CBO

49.5%

1.24

1.34

206

42.2%

39.9%

8.3

Bollinger CBO

51.8%

1.52

1.52

130

54.6%

34.1%

7.8

Donchian Trend 29.4%

0.80

0.99

1.832

39.7%

36.7%

27.6

Donchian Time

57.2%

1.31

1.35

746

58.3%

43.6%

12.1

Dual MA

57.8%

1.82

1.55

210

39.5%

31.8%

8.3

Triple MA

48.1%

1.53

1.37

181

42.5%

31.3%

8.5

Source: Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.
Note: Channel Breakout is abbreviated as CBO and Moving Average is abbreviated as MA,
Drawdown as DD, Maximum as Max, and Winning Percentage as W% in 10-1 and other
tables in this book.

When I ﬁrst tested the time-based exits, I was ﬂoored. They performed far better than I had imagined they would, better even than
the breakout-based exits. So much for the idea that it is the exit that
makes a system proﬁtable. This shows that an entry that has an edge
can account for the entire proﬁtability of a system.
Note also how the Donchian system did not perform as well as
the other systems. This highlights how breakouts have lost some of
their edge in the years since the Turtle program. I believe this is
largely due to what I describe in the Chapter 11 as trader effects.
The other notable surprise in Table 10-1 is the performance of the
Dual Moving Average system, which demonstrated better performance than did its more complex counterpart the Triple Moving Average System. This is just one example of many that suggest that the
fact that a system is complex does not necessarily make it better.
All of these are basic systems. Three of them—the Dual Moving
Average system, the Triple Moving Average system, and the Donchian

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 145

Trend with time-based exit system—do not even have any stops.
This means that they violate one of the most cherished maxims of
trading—“Always have a stop loss”—yet their risk-adjusted performance is as good as or better than that of the other systems.

Adding Stops
Many traders are uncomfortable with the idea of having absolutely
no stops. What do you think will happen to the performance of the
Dual Moving Average system if we add stops? Many people like to
speculate about these sorts of things. They ask their friends or go
to more experienced traders with their questions.
I prefer to try out an idea and beneﬁt from the conﬁdence that
comes from having concrete answers. Figure 10-6 demonstrates the
effect of using a stop at various widths in ATR from the point of
entry.
Note that the zero case, which means no stop at all, has the best
MAR ratio numbers. In fact, the test with no stops is better for all
the metrics: CAGR%, MAR ratio, Sharpe ratio, drawdown, and
length of drawdown—every single metric. The same thing holds
true for a test of the Triple Moving Average system: Every single
measure was worse with any stops. The same test of stops applied
to the Donchian Trend with time-based exit system yields similar
results except that for very large stops of 10 ATR or more, the results
are about the same as those for a test with no stops. This certainly
goes against the common belief that one must always have a stop.
Why is this? Weren’t we taught that stops are very important for
preserving capital? How come the drawdowns do not go down
when we add stops?

MAR Ratio as Stop (in ATR) Varies
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2

• 146 •

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Figure 10-6

Effect of Stops on the Dual Moving Average System

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

10
.5
11
.0
11
.5
12
.0
12
.5
13
.0
13
.5
14
.0
14
.5
15
.0

5

.0
10

0

Stop (in ATR)

9.

5

9.

0

8.

5

8.

7.

5

0
7.

0

6.

5

6.

0

5.

5

0

5.

4.

5

4.

0

3.

5

3.

0

2.

5

2.

0

1.

5

1.

0.

0.

0

0.0

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 147

Many traders believe that what they need to worry about is the
risk of a series of losing trades. Although this may be true for shortterm traders who have trades that last for a few days, it is not true
for trend followers. For trend followers, drawdowns also come from
trend reversals, usually after major trends. Sometimes the trend
reversals are followed by very volatile markets in which it can be
extremely difﬁcult to trade.
We Turtles knew that giving up part of the proﬁts we had accumulated during a trend is a normal part of trading as a trend follower. We knew that we would experience large drawdowns.
Nevertheless, this was really painful for some of the Turtles, especially the ones who were the most affected by losing money. Watching proﬁts vanish after they have just been earned is the hardest
part of our style of trading.
Thus, it is not entry risk that causes drawdowns for trend followers; it is giving back proﬁts. This will be covered more extensively Chapter 11, but ﬁrst let’s return to testing the systems.

The Results Are In Again
Recall that the systems were tested through the end of June 2006,
and as I write this, many more months have passed. You may be
curious about what happened to our systems in the interim.
Which system would you have picked to trade based on the data
through June 2006? If you could have chosen two systems, which
ones would you have picked? I changed the end date for the tests,
using data through the end of November 2006, and Table 10-2
shows the updated results.

148 • Way of the Turtle

Table 10-2

Historical System Performance Comparison through November
2006

System

CAGR%

MAR

Sharpe Trades W%

Max
DD

DD
Length

ATR CBO

45.9%

1.15

1.27

216

43.1%

40.0%

8.3

Bollinger CBO

49.2%

1.44

1.47

136

53.7%

34.1%

7.8

Donchian Trend 27.4%

0.75

0.94

1901

38.7%

38.7%

27.6

Donchian Time

57.1%

1.31

1.34

773

59.1%

43.6%

12.1

Dual MA

49.1%

1.04

1.34

222

36.9%

47.2%

8.3

Triple MA

41.2%

0.97

1.21

186

41.9%

42.3%

8.5

Source: Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

A quick glance at the CAGR% and MAR ratio tells you fairly
quickly that the last few months of 2006 were bad for trend-following systems in general. The interesting aspect here is the
changes that occurred. Table 10-3 reveals the percentage changes
in CAGR% and maximum drawdown.
Table 10-3

Comparative Performance through June 2006 versus through
November 2006

System

CAGR%
11/06

CAGR%
06/06

%

ATR CBO

45.9%

49.5%

Bollinger CBO

49.2%

Donchian Trend

Max DD
11/06

Max DD
06/06

%

–7.3% 40.0%

39.9%

0.3%

51.8%

–5.0% 34.1%

34.1%

0.0%

27.4%

29.4%

–6.8% 38.7%

36.7%

5.4%

Donchian Time

57.1%

57.2%

–0.2% 43.6%

43.6%

0.0%

Dual MA

49.1%

57.8%

–15.1% 47.2%

31.8%

48.4%

Triple MA

41.2%

48.1%

–14.3% 42.3%

31.3%

35.1%

Source: Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step • 149

What happened? How did our results change so dramatically?
Why did our best system have a 50 percent increase in the size of
the drawdown? Why did the system that used the simplest exit have
no change in performance over the last ﬁve months when some
other systems did especially poorly? How does a trader build systems that are more likely to perform to expectations? Put a different way, how can you conform your expectations to better ﬁt the
probable outcomes of trading a system?
These questions offer an apt introduction to Chapter 11, which
will examine all these issues and increase your understanding of
the difference between the results you might get in a backtest and
what you might expect in actual trading, as well as those factors
which inﬂuence the disparity between tested and actual trading
results.

This page intentionally left blank

eleven
LIES, DAMN LIES,
AND BACKTESTS
Charlatans and scoundrels lurk in dark corners,
awaiting the unsuspecting. Don’t be their prey.

The Stonehenge Plus system TURNED $5,000 INTO $1,000,000
in JUST 5 YEARS. Stonehenge Plus was invented by Stupendus
Magniﬁcus, a NASA scientist who discovered a way to use the same
process used to launch the Mars Rover for trading currencies.
OVER 90% ACCURATE, it hasn’t had a losing month
in 10 years. It is so good we are only going to sell 100 COPIES.
Get yours now while there is still time for only $1,999.
—Advertisement from a system vendor

nyone who has been around trading for any amount of time
has seen ads like this one, as has anyone who has his or her
name on a mailing list and is interested in trading. But buyer
beware: There are charlatans who use irresponsible marketing tactics and unrealistic backtest results to tout their newest inventions.

A

• 151 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

152 • Way of the Turtle

Many of those vendors build systems that they know will never yield
returns at the levels they are advertising. Many of them intentionally alter the tests to make their systems look better than they really
are. However, not all vendors are that unscrupulous. There are some
who sell systems that they believe will work well without realizing
that their basic methods are ﬂawed or knowing the limitations of
historical testing and the pitfalls of using historical test results to predict future performance. Of course, there are those who are skilled
at avoiding the pitfalls of historical testing. Unfortunately, these vendors are very few in number and it is extremely difﬁcult for an inexperienced trader to distinguish between the systems that have been
developed using good testing methods and those that have not.
Even highly experienced traders often do not know the reasons
why their systems perform much more poorly in actual trading
than they do in historical simulations. They know this phenomenon exists and compensate for it but do not understand its
causes. There are four major sources of the discrepancies traders
often ﬁnd between historical test results and what is encountered
in actual trading:

• Trader effects: The fact that a particular method has made a
lot of money in the recent past increases the likelihood that
other traders will have noticed it and will start using similar
ideas, increasing the chances that the method will not work
as well as it did initially.
• Random effects: The historical test may have demonstrated
better performance than the underlying edge normally
would indicate as a result of purely random chance.

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 153

• Optimization paradox: The act of determining the
particular parameter, such as choosing a 25-day moving
average instead of a 30-day average, reduces the predictive
value of the backtest itself.
• Overﬁtting or curve ﬁtting: The system may be so
complicated that it has no predictive value. Because it is
tuned to the historical data so closely, a slight alteration in
market behavior will produce markedly poorer results.

Trader Effects
An observer effect is a concept from physics in which the act of
measuring a phenomenon sometimes affects that phenomenon;
the observer disturbs the experiment by the act of observing. A
similar thing happens in trading: The act of trading itself can
change the underlying market conditions on which the success
of a trade is predicated. I call this a trader effect. Anything that
repeats with enough consistency is likely to be noticed by several
market participants. Similarly, a strategy that has worked especially well in the recent past is likely to be noticed by many
traders. However, if too many traders start to try to take advantage
of a particular strategy, that strategy will cease working as well as
it did previously.
Let us consider the breakout strategy. If you knew that there were
going to be many large traders buying at the breakout in a relatively
thin market, what could you do to make money from them? What
strategy could you employ that would be like printing money?
You would buy your orders ahead of those of other traders and
in so doing cause a rise in prices to the levels that triggered the

154 • Way of the Turtle

orders from those large traders. Then you could sell your position
back to them for a guaranteed proﬁt; in effect you would have
moved the price to take advantage of the other buyers.
Imagine that you are a gold trader. If you knew that there would
be large buy orders from ACME, say, 1,000 contracts in August
gold at $410.50, what might you be able to do?
If you could buy enough to reach those stops, you could make
money by selling the contracts back when the stop was hit. On the
one hand, if the price was far enough away from those stops, it
might take more money than you had to guarantee that you could
move the market to reach those buy orders. On the other hand, if
the price was close enough, say, at $408.00, a series of buy market
orders might raise the price enough to trigger those additional buy
orders from ACME.
Since you would be buying and then quickly selling right afterward, you might change the meaning of a breakout itself. Before
the addition of the trader effects, a breakout might have signiﬁed
that resistance had been broken, and so there was a greater likelihood of favorable price movement when a breakout occurred.
However, with the addition of the new buys, which are designed
only to move the market enough to cause a breakout to occur, the
meaning of the breakout has been altered.
Let us examine this concept using a speciﬁc example. Assume
that there were no buyers willing to buy at $408.00 or higher but
there were sellers willing to sell 1,000 contracts at anything above
$409.00, and these sell orders would act as a ceiling keeping the
price from going over $409.00. Before the addition of your buy
orders, the market would not have advanced to the price of
$410.50, and so the breakout would not have happened. Therefore,

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 155

in a simulation for a breakout-based system that looked at this trade
there would not have been a breakout and thus no trade.
Now suppose that in the same circumstances you enter the market and buy up those 1,000 contracts at an average price of $409.00;
there are no more sellers at that price, and so you have to buy
another 100 from the sellers at $411.00. This trade causes the large
buyer to begin buying, at which time you sell him the 1,000 contracts at $411.00. Although he thinks he got a good price, you made
an excellent trade. All that remains is to get rid of the extra 100 contracts. Since there are no buyers at the recent prices, you have to
sell lower, and so you sell your 100 contracts back where the market had been trading: at $407.00. You lose $4  100 ounces on
100 contracts, or $40,000, but you made $2  100 ounces on 1,000
contracts for a new proﬁt of $160,000 not counting commissions.
Not bad for a few seconds’ work.
What happened to those traders from ACME who had been
counting on the edge in the breakout? They are sitting on a large
position that was entered for reasons different from those their backtest would have indicated. This is the result of a trader effect.
One speciﬁc example of this is provided by a system that became
very popular a few years back because it had maintained excellent
performance for many years. For that reason, lots of brokers started
to offer it to their customers. At one time I heard estimates that several hundred million dollars in aggregate was being traded using
this system. Shortly after the system reached its peak in popularity,
those trading it experienced a prolonged drawdown that was much
longer and higher than anything that had occurred in 20 years of
backtesting. The system had an exploitable ﬂaw. If the closing price
passed a certain level, there would be buy or sell orders on the fol-

156 • Way of the Turtle

lowing morning’s open. Since other traders knew the price levels
that would trigger those orders, it was a simple matter to buy on the
close ahead of the next morning’s open. One then could exit the
position by selling just after the following day’s open, which would
generally be much higher because of all the buy orders that had
been generated overnight as a result of the system’s rules.
To make matters worse, the system’s authors used portfolios that
included illiquid markets such as lumber and propane, which
could move quite a bit on relatively light volume, and so many people who traded with the system also traded those illiquid markets.
I’m sure that one of the reasons for that system’s sudden unprecedented drawdown was exactly this sort of anticipatory buying, which
effectively ruined its edge for a time. Other traders are not that
dense. They will exploit any repeated patterns that they notice. This
is one of the reasons why it is better to develop your own system;
you can build a system with which it is much less likely that you
will have your edge ruined by trader effects because other traders
will not know exactly when you will be buying or selling.
When we traded for Rich, there were often times when we would
all be entering trades at essentially the same time. Market traders
knew that when they started to get large orders from us, the orders
probably would continue for quite some time. For that reason, at
times the ﬂoor traders and brokers would start to move the market
ahead of our orders. Since we used limit orders, this was a bit more
risky—that was one of the reasons we used limit orders—because
we would not get ﬁlled in those circumstances and so we could pull
our orders. Sometimes when I wanted to buy and knew that the
market was particularly prone to having the locals move it in anticipation of our orders, I would send fake orders in the opposite direc-

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 157

tion. Then, if the market moved, I would cancel the original order
and place a limit order much closer to the market or even on the
other side of the ask. For example, if I wanted to buy 100 contracts,
I might ﬁrst place a fake sell order. If that fake order was a sell of
100 contracts at $415 and the market was trading at $410 bid and
$412 ask, the presence of the order might move the market to $405
bid and $408 ask. I then might cancel the fake limit order and enter
one to buy at a $410 limit that probably would get ﬁlled at $408 or
$410, which was the original ask before my ﬁrst order.
I did not do this very often, just enough to keep other traders
guessing about what we were doing. In some respects it was a bit
like blufﬁng in poker. You cannot bluff all the time or you’ll get
called and end up losing the bluffs and your bets. However, an
occasional bluff can help your play considerably because it forces
the other players to call you sometimes when you actually have a
good hand, resulting in a larger pot when you have the winning
hand. You also may win pots with the bluff, and that also increases
your winnings.
Just as an occasional bluff makes it harder for your opponents to
ﬁgure out what you are doing, the Turtles added quite a bit of confusion for anyone who was trying to ﬁgure out how Richard Dennis was trading. Some of us used small stops, some used larger ones,
some of us bought right at the breakout, some just after, some just
before; in all we created a lot of obfuscation that probably helped
him get better ﬁlls for his orders.
Note that a trader effect can occur without any conscious attempt
by traders to front-run other traders’ orders. If too many traders
attempt to exploit a given market phenomenon, that can ruin the
edge for that phenomenon, at least for a period, because their orders

158 • Way of the Turtle

will tend to dilute the edge. This problem is especially prevalent in
arbitrage-type trading, where the edge is relatively small.

Random Effects
Most traders do not understand the degree to which completely
random chance can affect their trading results. The typical investor
understands this even less than the typical trader does. Even very
experienced investors such as those who operate and make decisions for pension funds and hedge funds generally do not understand the extent of this effect. Results can vary to an amazing
degree solely on the basis of random events. The amount of variation displayed in a series of historical simulations that include random events is surprisingly high. This section examines the range
of possibilities that could be due entirely to random effects in the
domain of long-term trend following.
In the discussion of the edge ratio I ran a simulation for an entry
that randomly enters long or short at the open, depending on the
computer equivalent of a coin ﬂip. I created a complete system that
combines random entries based on a coin ﬂip with a time-based
exit some number of days later within the range of 20 days to 120
days. I then ran 100 tests with the same data that was used in Chapter 10 to compare trend-following strategies. The best test in the
simulation returned 16.9 percent and turned $1 million into about
$5.5 million in the 10.5 years of the test. The worst test in the simulation lost 20 percent per year. This shows that there is a good deal
of variance that is due entirely to random events.
What happens if we add a little edge? What if we make our system similar to a trend-following system by including the trend ﬁl-

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 159

ter we use with the Donchian Trend system so that trades are
entered randomly, but only if they are in the same direction as the
major trend? The answers to these questions are interesting because
if you examine the track record of any group of trend-following
funds, there is a lot of variance in performance. If the performance
of a particular fund is good, the manager of that fund will say, of
course, that this success is due to superior strategies and execution.
Superior performance actually may be due to random effects rather
than superior strategies. You can understand this better if you consider the extent to which those random effects can inﬂuence outcomes when there is some edge.
If you add a trend ﬁlter with a positive edge to the completely
random system, the average performance for 100 tests moves up
considerably. In my simulation, the average return rose to 32.46 percent and the average drawdown dropped to 43.74 percent. Even
with the addition of the trend ﬁlter, there remains a large variance
among the individual tests. Out of 100 random tests in the simulation, the single best test showed returns of 53.3 percent, a MAR ratio
of 1.58, and a maximum drawdown of 33.6 percent. The worst test
showed returns of 17.5 percent with a drawdown of 62.7 percent.
Luck or random effects play a large role in the performance of
actual traders and actual funds even though the best traders do not
like to admit that to their investors. Investors believe that a track
record is more deﬁnitive than it actually is. For example, anyone
investing in a particular fund generally expects to achieve performance after investment similar to the fund’s historical performance. The problem is that it is impossible to know the difference
between a truly great trading operation that is having average luck
and an average trading operation that is having excellent luck if one

160 • Way of the Turtle

looks only at the track record. The random effects are too large and
common for that to be known with certainty.
Consider the best track record from the 100-test simulation that
was cited above. If one traded less aggressively, for example, at 25
percent of the level we did as Turtles, one of the tests would have
achieved returns of 25.7 percent with a drawdown of 17.7 percent
with a 10-year track record. We all know that a trader who entered
randomly would not be more likely in the future to perform at the
same level since there is no edge in trading randomly. Unfortunately, for anyone looking only at a track record, out of a large
group of traders some will have been lucky enough to seem to know
what they are doing when they actually do not.

Lucky Genes
Another way to understand random effects is to look at their existence in nature. Intelligence, height, athletic ability, singing ability—all these qualities are the result of random effects. If you have
good genes for a particular trait (i.e., your parents both had a particular trait), you are much more likely than most people to have
that trait, though perhaps not to the same degree. If your father
and mother are both very tall, you probably will be very tall, but
the farther they drift from the norm, the more likely you are to be
shorter than they are.
In genetics and in statistics this is known as reversion to the mean
or the regression effect. A person with very tall parents also has parents with tall genes and a very lucky combination of those genes
from a height perspective. But a person with lucky genes is able to
pass on his genes but not his luck, and so a child born to those parents is more likely to be closer to average since that child is not as

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 161

likely to have the same “lucky” arrangement of the genes that the
parents did.

Bad News for Investors
When one starts to use performance measures to separate a group
of funds into the good ones and the underperforming ones, one is
very likely to encounter random effects. The reason for this is that
there are more lucky average traders than unlucky good traders.
Consider a universe of 1,000 traders in which perhaps 5 or 6 are
truly excellent traders. If 80 percent of the 1,000 are close to average traders, there are only 5 or 6 traders who have an opportunity to
get unlucky, but there are 800 with the opportunity to get lucky. If
2 percent of traders get lucky enough to have a good track record
for 10 years—and the test described above shows that the actual
number is probably even higher than that—this means that there is
a group of 21 traders with excellent performance, only one-quarter
of whom are actually excellent traders.

Luck and Time
Time tends to favor the truly excellent traders rather than merely
the lucky ones. If there are 16 traders who are lucky for 10 years,
after another 15 years their performance is much more likely to be
closer to average. Conversely, if you consider only 5-year track
records, the number of seemingly excellent traders who are actually
only lucky traders skyrockets. This is because over shorter measurement periods the extent of the random effects is also much greater.
What happens to variance in our test if we use a shorter time
frame, perhaps only the 3.5 years from January 2003 through June
2006? For this period, the average performance for the random

162 • Way of the Turtle

entry system was a 35 percent return with a MAR ratio of 1.06. The
real systems did considerably better. The Triple Moving Average
system returned 48.5 percent with a MAR ratio of 1.50. The
Bollinger Breakout system returned 52.2 percent with a MAR ratio
of 1.54. The Dual Moving Average system returned 49.7 percent
with a MAR ratio of 1.25.
As for the random tests, how many lucky traders emerged from
the 100 tests in the simulation? How many beat our best system’s
performance purely on the basis of luck? Seventeen out of 100 had
a MAR ratio better than 1.54; of those 17 tests, 7 had a return
higher than 52.2 percent. The very best random trader returned
71.4 percent with a drawdown of 34.5 percent for a MAR ratio of
2.07. All this is something to think about the next time you are looking at a three-year track record with excellent performance.
When you are looking at a short-term track record, you should
realize that much of what you are seeing is attributable to luck. If
you want to know whether a particular trader is one of the lucky
average or one of the excellent few, you need to dig deeper than
the track record and focus on the people behind the track record.
Good investors invest in people, not historical performance.
They know how to identify traits that will lead to excellent performance in the future, and they know how to identify traits that
are indicative of average trading ability. This is the best way to overcome random effects. The good news for those who are doing historical simulations is that it is fairly easy to detect when backtest
results probably are due to random effects rather than to a system’s
edge. Chapter 12 will discuss ways in which this can be done, but
ﬁrst let’s look at two more reasons why backtest results do not
match reality.

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 163

Optimization
An effect that I call the optimization paradox is another reason
for the divergence between tested results and actual results. This
paradox is the cause of much confusion, especially for traders who
are new to computer simulation. Optimization is the process of
determining which particular numeric values to use in trading
with a system that requires computations that employ speciﬁc
numbers. These numbers are called parameters. For example, the
number of days in a long moving average is a parameter; the number of days in a short moving average is another parameter. Optimization is the process of choosing the best, or optimum, values
for those parameters. Many traders say that optimization is bad
because it leads to curve ﬁtting and results in poor performance.
I say that’s bunk!
Optimization is good when it is done correctly because it is
always better to understand the performance characteristics of
changes to a parameter than to be ignorant of them. An examination of the changes in the performance measures of a parameter
often reveals signs that performance is due to random effects or
overﬁtting rather than to the edge of a system. Optimization is simply the process of discovering the impact on the results of varying
a particular parameter across different values and then using that
information to make an informed decision about which speciﬁc
parameter value to use in actual trading.
Traders who believe that optimization is bad or dangerous think
that way because they do not understand the optimization paradox
and because they have seen the effects of improper optimization
that leads to what is known in statistics as overﬁtting.

164 • Way of the Turtle

The Optimization Paradox
The optimization paradox states that parameter optimization results
in a system that is more likely to perform well in the future but less
likely to perform as well as the simulation indicates. Thus, optimization improves the likely performance of the system while
decreasing the predictive accuracy of the historical simulation metrics. I believe that an incomplete understanding of this paradox
and its causes has led many traders to shy away from optimizing systems out of a fear of overoptimizing or curve ﬁtting a system. However, I contend that proper optimization is always desirable.
Using parameter values that result from proper optimization
should increase the likelihood of getting good results in actual trading in the future. A speciﬁc example will help explain this. Consider the Bollinger Breakout system, which has two parameters.
Figure 11-1 shows a graph of the values for the MAR ratio as the
entry threshold parameter, which deﬁnes the width of the volatility channel in standard deviation, varies from 1 standard deviation
to 4 standard deviations.
Note how the results for a channel with a width of 2.4 standard
deviations are the peak for this simulation. Any value for the entry
threshold that is less than 2.4 or greater than 2.4 results in a test
that shows a lower MAR ratio.
Now, returning to our premise that optimization is beneﬁcial,
suppose we had not considered optimizing the channel width and
instead had decided arbitrarily to use a channel width of 3.0 since
we recalled from high-school statistics that 99-plus percent of values for normal distributions fall within 3 standard deviations of the
average. If the future is fairly close to the past, we would have been
leaving a lot of money on the table and would have subjected our

MAR Ratio as Entry Threshold (std. dev.) Varies
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0

• 165 •

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Figure 11-1 Change in MAR Ratio as the Entry Threshold Varies
Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

9

0
4.

3.

7
3.

3.
8

3.
6

4

3.
5

3

3.

3.

1

0

3.
2

3.

3.

9

8

Entry Threshold (std. dev.)

2.

7

2.

6

2.

5

2.

2.

3
2.
4

2.

2.
2

0

2.
1

9

2.

8

1.

6

7

1.

1.

1.

1.
5

3

2

1.
4

1.

1

1.

1.

1.

0

0.0

166 • Way of the Turtle

trading to much greater drawdowns than a 2.4-standard deviation
entry threshold would have provided. To give you an idea how great
that difference could have been, consider that the test at 2.4 makes
8 times as much money over the 10.5-year test with the same drawdown as the test at 3.0 does, with returns of 54.5 percent versus 28.2
percent for the test with an entry threshold of 3.0.
Not optimizing means leaving things to chance through ignorance. Having seen the effects of changes to this parameter, we
now have a much greater understanding of the performance ramiﬁcations of the entry threshold parameter and how the results
are sensitive to that parameter. We know that if the channel
width is too narrow, you get too many trades, and that hurts performance; if it is too wide, you have given up too much of the
trend while waiting to enter, and that also hurts performance.
Not doing this research because you were afraid of over optimizing or curve ﬁtting would have deprived you of a good deal
of useful knowledge that could materially improve your trading
results and give you other ideas for better systems in the future.
The following sections introduce you to a few more parameters,
which you can see also have a mountain or hill shape when they
are varied.

Moving Average Days Parameter
Figure 11-2 shows a graph of the values for the MAR ratio as the
number of days in the moving average, which deﬁnes the center of
the Bollinger band volatility channel, varies from 150 to 500.
Note how the results for the 350-day value are the peak for this
test. Any value that is less than 350 or greater than 350 results in a
test with a lower MAR ratio.

MAR Ratio as Close Average (days) Varies
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0

• 167 •

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Close Average (days)

Figure 11-2

Change in MAR Ratio as the Number of Days in the Moving Average Varies

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

0
52

50
0

0
48

0
46

44
0

42
0

0
40

38
0

0
36

0
34

0
32

0
30

0
28

0
26

0
24

0
22

0
20

0
18

0
16

14

0

0.0

168 • Way of the Turtle

Figure 11-1 showed a graph of the values for the MAR ratio as
the exit threshold parameter varies. The exit threshold is a parameter that deﬁnes the point of exit. In the book’s earlier discussion
of the Bollinger Breakout system, the system exited when the close
crossed the moving average that deﬁned the center of the channel.
In this test I wanted to see what would happen if the system exited
either before or after the crossover. For long trades a positive exit
threshold means the number of standard deviations above the moving average, and for short trades it means the number of standard
deviations below it. Negative values mean below the moving average for long trades and above the moving average for short trades.
A value of zero for this parameter is the same as the original system, which exited at the moving average.
Consider what happens as the exit threshold varies from –1.5
to 1.0, as shown in Figure 11-3. Notice how the results for the
–0.8 value are the peak for this test. Any value that is less than
–0.8 or greater than –0.8 results in a test that shows a lower MAR
ratio.

The Basis of Predictive Value
A historical test has predictive value to the extent that it shows performance that a trader is likely to encounter in the future. The
more the future is like the past, the more future trading results will
be similar to the results of historical simulation. A big problem with
using historical testing as a means of system analysis is that the
future will never be exactly like the past. To the extent that a system captures its proﬁts from the effects of unchanging human
behavioral characteristics that are reﬂected in the market, the past
offers a reasonable approximation of the future, though never an

MAR Ratio as Exit Threshold Varies
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0

• 169 •

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Exit Threshold

Figure 11-3

Change in MAR Ratio as the Exit Threshold Varies

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

0

9

1.

0.

8

7

0.

0.

5

6
0.

0.

4

3

0.

0.

2

1

0.

0.

0

.1
-0

.3
-0

-0
.2

.4

.5

-0

-0

.6

.7

-0

-0

.8

.9

-0

-0

.0

.1

-1

-1

.2

.3

-1

-1

.4
-1

-1

.5

0.0

170 • Way of the Turtle

exact one. The historical results of a test run with all optimized
parameters represent a very speciﬁc set of trades: those trades which
would have resulted if the system had been traded with the very
best parameters. The corresponding simulation results represent a
best-case view of the past.
One should expect to get these results in actual trading if the
future corresponds exactly to the past, but that will never happen!
Now consider the graphs displayed in the ﬁgures throughout this
chapter: Each graph has a shape like the top of a mountain with a
peak value. One might represent a given parameter with the graph
shown in Figure 11-4.
If the value at point A represents a typical nonoptimized parameter value and the value at point B represents an optimized parameter, I argue that B represents a better parameter value to trade but
one where the future actual trading results probably will be worse
than that indicated by historical tests.
Parameter A is the worse parameter to trade but the one with
better predictive value because if the system is traded at that value,

Example Parameters A and B

A
Figure 11-4

B

Example Parameters A and B

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 171

future actual results are just as likely to be better than or worse
than those indicated by the historical tests that use value A for the
parameter.
Why is this? To make it clearer, let’s assume that the future will
vary in such a way that it is likely to alter the graph slightly to the
left or the right, but we do not know which. The graph in Figure
11-5 shows A and B with a band of values to the left and right that
represent the possible shifts that result from the future being different from the past that we’ll call margins of error.
In the case of value A, any shifts of the optimal parameter value
to the left of A on the graph will result in worse performance than
point A, and any shifts of the optimal parameter value right of A
will result in better performance. Thus, the test result with a parameter value of A represents a decent predictor regardless of how the
future changes since it is just as likely to be underpredicting as overpredicting the future.
This is not the case with value B. In all cases, any shift at all,
either to the left or to the right, will result in worse performance.

Parameters A and B with Margins of Error

A
Figure 11-5

B

Parameters A and B with Margins of Error

172 • Way of the Turtle

This means that a test run with a value of B is very likely to overpredict the future results. When this effect is compounded across
many different parameters, the effect of a drift in the future also
will be compounded. This means that with many optimized parameters it becomes more and more unlikely that the future will be as
bright as the predictions of the testing done with those optimized
parameters.
This does not mean that we should use value A in our trading.
Even in the event of a sizable shift, the values around the B point
are still higher than those around the A point. Thus, even though
optimization reduces the predictive value, you still want to trade
using values that are likely to give good results in the event of
drift.
The optimization paradox has been the source of much deception and scamming. Many unscrupulous system vendors have used
the very high returns and incredible results made possible through
optimization, especially over shorter periods, by using market-speciﬁc optimization to show historical results that they know cannot
be achieved in actual trading. However, the fact that optimization
can result in tests that overstate likely future results does not mean
that optimization should not be performed. Indeed, optimization
is critical to the building of robust trading systems.

Overﬁtting or Curve Fitting
Scammers also use other methods to generate historical results that
are unrealistic. The most unscrupulous ones intentionally overﬁt
or curve ﬁt their systems. Overﬁtting often is confused with the optimization paradox, but they concern different issues.

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 173

Overﬁtting occurs when systems become too complex. It is possible to add rules to a system that will improve its historical performance, but that happens only because those rules affect a very
small number of important trades. Adding those rules can create
overﬁtting. This is especially true for trades that occur during critical periods in the equity curve for the system. For example, a rule
that lets you exit a particularly large winning trade close to the peak
certainly would improve performance but would be overﬁt if it did
not apply to enough other situations.
I have seen many examples where system vendors have used this
technique to improve results of their systems after a period of relatively
poor performance. They sometimes sell the new improved systems as
plus or II versions of their original systems. Anyone contemplating a
purchase of a system “improved” in this matter would do well to investigate the nature of the rules which constitute the improvements to
make sure that they have not beneﬁted from overﬁtting.
I often ﬁnd it useful to look at examples of a phenomenon taken
to the extreme to understand it better. Here I will present a system
that does some pretty egregious things that overﬁt the data. We will
start with a very simple system, the Dual Moving Average system,
and add rules that start to overﬁt the data.
Remember that this system had a very nasty drawdown in the last
six months. Therefore, I will add a few new rules to ﬁx that drawdown and improve performance. I am going to reduce my positions
by a certain percentage when the drawdown reaches a particular
threshold and then, when the drawdown is over, resume trading at
the normal size.
To implement this idea, let’s add a new rule to the system with
two new parameters for optimization: the amount to be reduced and

174 • Way of the Turtle

the threshold at which that reduction occurs. Looking at our simulation’s equity curve, I decide that reducing positions by 90 percent
when I reach a drawdown of 38 percent will limit the drawdowns.
The addition of this rule improves the returns, which go from 41.4
percent without the rule to 45.7 percent with it, and the drawdown
drops from 56.0 percent to 39.2 percent, with the MAR ratio going
from 0.74 to 1.17. One might think, “This is a great rule; the system
is now much better.” However, this is completely incorrect!
The problem is that there is only one time during the entire test
when this rule comes into play. It happens at the very end of the
test, and I’ve taken advantage of my knowledge of the equity curve
to construct the rules, and so the system has been ﬁtted intentionally to the data. “What’s the harm?” you ask. Consider the shape of
the graph in Figure 11-6, where we vary the threshold for the drawdown where a reduction kicks in.
You may notice the rather abrupt drop in performance if we use
a drawdown threshold of less than 37 percent. In fact, a 1 percent
change in the drawdown threshold makes the difference between
earning 45.7 percent and losing 0.4 percent per year. The reason
for the drop in performance is that there is an instance in August
1996 where this rule kicks in and we cut back the position size so
much that the system does not earn enough money to dig out of
the hole created by the drawdown. Perhaps this is not such a good
rule. It worked in the ﬁrst instance only because the drawdown was
so close to the end of the test.
Traders call this phenomenon a cliff. The presence of cliffs—
large changes in results for a very small change in parameter values—is a good indication that you have overﬁt the data and can
expect results in actual trading that are wildly different from those

MAR Ratio as Drawdown Threshold Varies
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6

• 175 •

0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2

Drawdown Threshold

Figure 11-6

Change in MAR Ratio as the Number of Days in the Moving Average Varies

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

%

%
49
%
50
%

48

%

47

%

46

45

%

%
40
%
41
%
42
%
43
%
44
%

39

38

37
%

20

%
21
%
22
%
23
%
24
%
25
%
26
%
27
%
28
%
29
%
30
%
31
%
32
%
33
%
34
%
35
%
36
%

–0.4

176 • Way of the Turtle

which you achieved in testing. It is also another reason why optimizing parameters is good: You can see cliffs and ﬁx the source of
the problem before you start trading.

The Importance of Sample Size
As was noted brieﬂy in Chapter 2, people tend to place too much
importance on a small number of instances of a particular phenomenon despite the fact that from a statistical perspective very little information can be drawn from a few instances of any event.
This is the primary cause of overﬁtting. Rules that do not come into
play very often can cause inadvertent overﬁtting, which leads to a
divergence in performance between backtests and real trading.
This can happen inadvertently over the course of many instances
because most people are not used to thinking in these terms. A
good example is seasonality. If one tests for seasonal changes in 10
years of data, there will be at most 10 instances of a particular seasonal phenomenon since there are only 10 years of data. There is
very little statistical value in a sample size of 10, and so any tests
using those data will not be good predictors of future performance.
Let’s consider a rule that ignores this concept and uses the computer to help us ﬁnd the perfect way to overﬁt to our data. You
might notice that September was a bad month for a few years; then
you might test a rule that lightens positions in September by a certain percentage. Since you have a computer, you might decide to
have it search for any sort of seasonally bad periods in which you
should lighten up.
I did this for the system in this chapter. Then I ran 4,000 tests
that tested reducing positions at the beginning of each month and
then lightening up by a certain percentage for a certain number of

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 177

days and then resuming the previous position size when that number of days had passed. I found two such periods in the 10 years of
data I used for testing. If one lightens up 96 percent for the ﬁrst 2
days of September and the ﬁrst 25 days of July, one can get better
results. How much better?
The addition of this rule improves our returns, which move from
45.7 percent without the rule to 58.2 percent with it, and our drawdown goes up a tiny bit from 39.2 percent to 39.4 percent, whereas
the MAR ratio goes from 1.17 to 1.48. Again we think: “This is a
great rule; my system is now much better.”
Unfortunately, this rule works only because there were signiﬁcant
drawdowns during those periods in the past, not because there is
something magical about those periods. It is not very likely that the
drawdowns will occur on the same dates in the future. This is an
example of the worst kind of overﬁtting, but you would be surprised
how many otherwise intelligent people fall prey to this sort of trap.
If you do not know this, you might think that the system is good
enough to start trading with it. You might even start to raise money
from friends and family by telling them about this wonderful system and its results. The problem is that you really have a system
that returned 41.4 percent, not 58.2 percent; a drawdown of 56.0
percent, not 39.4 percent; and a MAR ratio of 0.74, not 1.48. You
are bound to be disappointed with the real performance because
you have been seduced by the easy improvements of curve ﬁtting.
Next I’ll examine ways to avoid the problems discussed in this
chapter. I’ll show ways to determine what you actually may be able
to achieve from a system in order to minimize the impact of trader
effects, detect random effects, properly optimize, and avoid overﬁtting to the historical data.

This page intentionally left blank

twelve
ON SOLID GROUND
Trading with poor methods is like learning to juggle while
standing in a rowboat during a storm. Sure, it can be done, but it is
much easier to juggle when one is standing on solid ground.

ow that you are aware of some of the major ways in which you
can get inaccurate results from backtests, you may be wondering: “How can I determine what I might actually be able to
achieve?” or “How do I avoid the problems described in Chapter
11?” or “How do I test the right way?” This chapter will discuss the
general principles of doing proper backtesting. A thorough understanding of the underlying causes of the backtesting predictive
errors discussed in Chapter 11 is an important prerequisite for this
chapter, and so it is a good idea to reread that chapter carefully if
you only skimmed it the ﬁrst time.
At best, you can get a rough sense of what the future holds by
looking at the results of historical simulation. However, fortunately,
even a rough idea can provide enough edge to enable a good trader
to make a lot of money. To understand the factors that affect the
margin of error, or degree of roughness, for your ideas, you need to
look at a few basic statistical concepts that provide the basis for his-

N

• 179 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

180 • Way of the Turtle

torical testing. Since I am not a big fan of books ﬁlled with formulas and lengthy explanations, I will try to keep the math light and
the explanations clear.

Statistical Basis for Testing
Proper testing takes into account the statistical concepts that affect
the descriptive ability of the tests as well as the limitations inherent in those descriptions. Improper testing can make you overconﬁdent when in reality there is little or no assurance the test results
have any predictive value. In fact, bad tests may provide the wrong
answer entirely.
Chapter 11 covered most of the reasons why historical simulations are at best rough estimates of the future. This chapter shows
how to increase the predictive ability of testing and get the best
rough estimate possible.
The area of statistics relating to inference by sampling from a
population is also the basis for the predictive potential of testing
through the use of historical data. The basic idea is that if you have
a sufﬁciently large sample, you can use measurements made on
that sample to infer likely ranges of measurements for the entire
group. So, if you look at a sufﬁciently large sample of past trades
for a particular strategy, you can draw conclusions about the likely
future performance of that strategy. This is the same area of statistics that pollsters use to make inferences about the behavior of a
larger population. For example, after polling 500 people drawn randomly from every state, pollsters draw conclusions about all the voters in the United States. Similarly, scientists assess the effectiveness
of a particular drug for the treatment of a particular disease on the

On Solid Ground • 181

basis of a relatively small study group because there is a statistical
basis for that inference.
The two major factors that affect the statistical validity of the
inferences derived from a sample of a population are the size of the
sample and the degree to which the sample is representative of the
overall population. Many traders and new system testers understand
sample size at a conceptual level but believe that it refers only to
the number of trades in a test. They do not understand that the statistical validity of tests can be lessened even when they cover thousands of trades if particular rules or concepts apply to only a few
instances of those trades.
They also often ignore the necessity that a sample be representative of the larger population as this is messy and hard to measure
without some subjective analysis. A system tester’s underlying
assumption is that the past is representative of what the future is
likely to bring. If this is the case and there is a sufﬁciently large sample, we can draw inferences from the past and apply them to the
future. If the sample is not representative of the future, the testing
is not useful and will not tell us anything about the likely future
performance of the system that is being tested. Thus, this assumption is critical. If a representative sample of 500 people is sufﬁcient
to determine who the new president is likely to be with a 2 percent
margin of error using a representative sample, would polling 500
attendees at the Democratic National Convention tell us anything
about the voting of the overall population? Of course it wouldn’t
because the sample would not be representative of the population
—it only includes Democrats whereas the actual U.S. voting population includes many Republicans who were not included in the
sample; Republicans probably will vote for candidates different

182 • Way of the Turtle

from the ones your poll indicated. When you make a sampling mistake like this, you get an answer, perhaps even the one you want,
but it is not necessarily the right answer.
Pollsters understand that the degree to which a sample truly
reﬂects the population it is intended to represent is the key issue. Polls
conducted with samples that are not representative are inaccurate,
and pollsters get ﬁred for conducting inaccurate polls. In trading,
this is also the key issue. Unfortunately, unlike pollsters, who generally understand the statistics of sampling, most traders do not.
This is perhaps most commonly seen when traders paper trade or
backtest over only the very most recent history. This is like polling
at the Democratic convention.
The problem with tests conducted over a short period is that during that period the market may have been in only one or two of the
market states described in Chapter 2, perhaps only in a stable and
volatile state, in which reversion to the mean and countertrend
strategies work well. If the market changes its state, the methods
being tested may not work as well. They may even cause a trader
to lose money. So, testing must be done in a way that maximizes
the likelihood that the trades taken in the test are representative of
what the future may hold.

Existing Measures Are Not Robust
In testing, you are trying to determine relative performance, assess
potential future performance, and determine whether a particular
idea has merit. One of the problems with this process is that the
generally accepted performance measures are not very stable—they
are not robust. This makes it difﬁcult to assess the relative merits

On Solid Ground • 183

of an idea because small changes in a few trades can have a large
effect on the values of these nonrobust measures. The effect of the
instability in the measures is that it can cause one to believe that
an idea has more merit than it actually has or discard an idea
because it does not appear to have as much promise as it might
when examined using more stable measures.
A statistic is robust if changing a small part of the data set does
not change that statistic signiﬁcantly. The existing measures are too
sensitive to changes in the data, too jumpy. This is one of the reasons that in doing historical simulation for trading system research,
slight differences in parameter values cause relatively large differences in some of the measures; the measures themselves are not
robust (i.e., they are too sensitive to small portions of the data). Anything that affects those small portions can affect the results too
greatly. This makes it easy to overﬁt and to fool yourself with results
that you will not be able to match in real life. The ﬁrst step in testing the Turtle Way is to address this issue by ﬁnding performance
measures that are robust and not sensitive to small changes in the
underlying data.
One of the questions that Bill Eckhardt asked me during my
initial interview for the Turtle position was: “Do you know what
a robust statistical estimator is?” I stared blankly for a few seconds
and admitted: “I have no idea.” (I now can answer that question.
There is a branch of mathematics that tries to address the issue
of imperfect information and poor assumptions; it is called robust
statistics.)
It is clear from the question that Bill had respect for the imperfect nature of testing and research based on historical data as well
as knowledge of the unknown that was rare at that time and is still

184 • Way of the Turtle

rare. I think this is one of the reasons Bill’s trading performance has
held up so well over the years.
This is yet another example of how far ahead of the industry Rich
and Bill’s research and thinking were. The more I learn, the deeper
my respect for their contribution to the ﬁeld becomes. I am also
surprised at how little the industry has advanced beyond what Rich
and Bill knew in 1983.

Robust Performance Measures
Earlier chapters in this book used the MAR ratio, CAGR%, and
the Sharpe ratio as comparative performance measures. These
measures are not robust, since they are very sensitive to the start
and end dates for a test. This is especially true for tests of less
than 10 years. Consider what happens when we adjust the start
and end dates for a test by a few months. To illustrate this effect,
let’s run a test that starts on February 1, 1996, instead of January
1 and that ends on April 30 instead of June 30, 2006, removing
just one month from the beginning of the test and two months
from the end.
A test of the Triple Moving Average system with the original test
dates returns 43.2 percent with a MAR ratio of 1.39 and a Sharpe
ratio of 1.25. With the revised start and stop dates, the return jumps
to 46.2 percent, with the MAR ratio increasing to 1.61 and the
Sharpe ratio increasing to 1.37. A test of the ATR Channel Breakout system with the original dates shows returns of 51.7 percent, a
MAR ratio of 1.31, and a Sharpe ratio of 1.39. With the revised
dates, the return climbs to 54.9 percent, the MAR ratio increases
to 1.49, and the Sharpe ratio increases to 1.47.

On Solid Ground • 185

The reason we see this sensitivity across all three measures is that
the MAR ratio and the Sharpe ratio have return as a component of
their numerators and return, whether expressed by CAGR% used
for MAR or monthly average return used for the Sharpe ratio, is
sensitive to start and stop dates. The maximum drawdown can also
be sensitive to start and stop dates when that drawdown occurs near
the beginning or end of a test. This has the effect of making the
MAR ratio especially sensitive since it is composed of two components, both of which are sensitive to start and end dates; therefore,
the effect of a change gets multiplied during the computation of
this ratio.
The reason CAGR% is sensitive to changes in start and stop
dates is that it represents the slope of the smooth line that goes from
the start of the test to the end of the test on a logarithmic graph;
changing the start and stop dates can change the slope of that line
signiﬁcantly. Figure 12-1 shows this effect.
Note how the slope of the line labeled “Revised Test Dates” is
higher than that of the line labeled “Original Test Dates.” In the
example above there was a drawdown at the beginning of the test

The Effect of Start and End Date Changes on CAGR%

Revised Test Dates

Original Test Dates

Figure 12-1

The Effect of Changes in the Start and End Dates on CAGR%

186 • Way of the Turtle

during January 1996; there was also a drawdown in the last two
months of the test: May and June 2006. So, by moving the test dates
a few months, we were able to eliminate both of those drawdowns.
This is the same effect seen in Figure 12-1: Removing a drawdown
on either end of a test will increase the slope of the line that deﬁnes
CAGR%.

Regressed Annual Return (RAR%)
A better measure of the slope is a simple linear regression of all the
points in each line. For readers who do not like math, a linear
regression is a fancy name for what sometimes is called a best ﬁt
line. The best way to think about this is to realize that it represents
the straight line that goes through the middle of all the points,
much like what would happen if you stretched the graph and
removed all the bumps by pulling on the ends without changing
the overall direction of the graph.
This linear regression line and the return it represents create a
new measure that I call the regressed annual return, or RAR% for
short. This measure is much less sensitive to changes in the data at
the end of the test. Figure 12-2 shows how the slope of the line
changes much less when the endpoints for RAR% change.
We can see how the RAR% measure is less sensitive to changes
in the test dates by running the same comparison we ran earlier
because the two lines are much closer to having the same slope.
The RAR% for the original test is 54.67 percent, whereas the RAR%
for the altered dates is 54.78 percent, only 0.11 percent higher.
Contrast this with the CAGR% measure, which changed by 3.0
percent points from 43.2 percent to 46.2 percent. For this test, the

On Solid Ground • 187

The Effect of Start and End Date Changes on RAR%

Revised Test Dates

Original Test Dates

Figure 12-2

The Effect of Changes in the Start and End Dates on RAR%

CAGR% was almost 30 times more sensitive to the change in the
end dates.
The monthly average return used in the Sharpe ratio is also sensitive to these changes because we are removing three bad months
from the end of the tests, and that affects the average return,
although the average return is affected less than the CAGR%. A
better measure to use in the numerator would be the RAR%.
As was noted earlier, the maximum drawdown component of the
MAR ratio is also sensitive to changes in start and end dates. If the
largest drawdown is on either end of the test, the performance
measure MAR will be affected considerably. The maximum drawdown is a single point on an equity curve, and so you are missing
out on some valuable additional data. A better measure is one that
includes more drawdowns. A system that had ﬁve large drawdowns
of 32 percent, 34 percent, 35 percent, 35 percent, and 36 percent
would be harder to trade than would a system that had drawdowns
of 20 percent, 25 percent, 26 percent, 29 percent, and 36 percent.
Further, the extent of the drawdown is only one dimension: All
30 percent drawdowns are not the same. I would not mind a draw-

188 • Way of the Turtle

down that lasted only two months before recovering to new highs
nearly as much as I would mind one that took two years to reach
new highs. The recovery time or the length of the drawdown itself
is also very important.

R-Cubed: A New Risk/Reward Measure
To take all these factors into account, I have created a new
risk/reward measure that I call the robust risk/reward ratio (RRRR).
I also like to call it R-cubed since I still have a bit of the nerdy engineer in me and tend to do these sorts of things. R-cubed uses RAR%
in the numerator and a new measure I call the length-adjusted average maximum drawdown in the denominator. There are two components to this measure: the average maximum drawdown and the
length adjustment.
The average maximum drawdown is computed by taking the ﬁve
largest drawdowns and dividing by 5. The length adjustment is
made by taking the average maximum drawdown length in days
and dividing it by 365 and then multiplying that number by the
average maximum drawdown. The average maximum drawdown
length is computed by using the same algorithm, that is, taking the
ﬁve longest drawdowns and dividing by 5. So, if the RAR% was 50
percent and the average maximum drawdown was 25 percent and
the average maximum drawdown length was one year, or 365 days,
you would have an R-cubed value of 2.0, which comes from 50 percent/(25 percent  365/365). R-cubed is a risk/reward measure that
accounts for risk from both a severity perspective and a duration
perspective. It does this by using measures that are less sensitive to
changes in the start and end dates. The measure is more robust

On Solid Ground • 189

than the MAR ratio; that is, it is less likely to change when minor
changes are made in the test.

Robust Sharpe Ratio
The robust Sharpe ratio is RAR% divided by the annualized standard deviation of the monthly return. This measure is less sensitive
to changes in the data set for the same reason that RAR% is less
sensitive than CAGR%, as was outlined above. Table 12-1 shows
how the robust measures are less sensitive to changes in the end
dates of the test.
Table 12-1

Normal versus Robust Measures

Normal Measures
CAGR%

Test 01/96
to 06/06

Test 02/96
to 04/06

%

51.7%

54.4%

5.2%

MAR ratio

1.31

1.47

12.2%

Sharpe ratio

1.39

1.46

5%

Robust Measures

Test 01/96
to 06/06

Test 02/96
to 04/06

%

RAR%

54.7%

4.9%

0.4%

R-cubed

3.31

3.63

9.7%

R-Sharpe

1.58

1.6

1.3%

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

As is shown in Table 12-1, robust measures are less sensitive to
change than are the existing measures. The R-cubed measure is sensitive to the addition or removal of large drawdowns but less sensitive
than is the MAR ratio. The impact of a single drawdown is diluted

190 • Way of the Turtle

by the averaging process used in the R-cubed measure. All the robust
measures were much less affected by these changes in data than were
their counterparts. If this test had not changed the maximum drawdown, the R-cubed measure would have shown the same 0.4 percent
change that RAR% shows and the differences between the measures
would have been even more dramatic as the MAR would have
changed 5.2 percent (the same as the CAGR% that is its numerator)
and the R-cubed measure would have changed 0.4 percent.
Another example of how robust measures hold up better can be
seen in the same performance comparison of our six basic systems
from Chapter 7. Recall how the performance dropped considerably
when we included the ﬁve months from July to November 2006.
Tables 12-2 and 12-3 show that robust measures held up much better over the relatively adverse conditions of the last several months.
Table 12-2 shows the percentage changes in RAR% compared with
the percentage change in CAGR% for these systems.
Table 12-2

Robustness of CAGR% versus RAR%

System

CAGR%
06/06

11/06

%

RAR%
06/06

11/06

%

ATR CBO

52.4%

48.7%

–7.0%

54.7%

55.0%

0.5%

Bollinger CBO

40.7%

36.7%

–9.8%

40.4%

40.7%

0.6%

Donchian Trend

27.2%

25.8%

–5.2%

28.0%

26.7%

–4.6%

Donchian Time

47.2%

4%

–0.4%

45.4%

44.8%

–1.4%

Dual Moving
Average

50.3%

42.4%

–15.7%

55.0%

53.6%

–2.6%

Triple Moving
Average

41.6%

36.0%

–13.5%

41.3%

40.8%

–1.2%

Average 

–8.6%

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

–1.4%

On Solid Ground • 191

The RAR% changed less than a sixth as much as the CAGR%
over this time period. This demonstrates that the RAR% measure
is much more robust than CAGR%, meaning that it will be more
stable over time during actual trading. The same holds true for the
risk/reward measure R-cubed compared with its less robust cousin
the MAR ratio. Table 12-3 lists the percentage changes in R-cubed
compared with the percentage change in the MAR ratio for these
systems.
Table 12-3

Robustness of R-Cubed versus the MAR Ratio

System

MAR Ratio
06/06
11/06

%

R4 06/06

11/06

%

ATR CBO

1.35

1.25

–7.4%

3.72

3.67

–1.4%

Bollinger CBO

1.29

1.17

–9.3%

3.48

3.31

–4.9%

Donchian Trend

0.76

0.72

–5.3%

1.32

1.17

–11.4%

Donchian Time

1.17

1.17

–0.0%

2.15

2.09

–2.8%

Dual Moving
Average

1.29

0.77

–40.3%

4.69

3.96

–15.6%

Triple Moving
Average

1.32

0.86

–34.9%

3.27

2.87

–12.2%

Average 

–16.2%

–8.0%

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

The R-cubed measure changed about half as much as the MAR
ratio did for the period indicated.
Robust measures are also less susceptible to the effect of luck
than nonrobust measures are. For example, a trader who happened to be on vacation and avoided the largest drawdown for a
particular type of trading would show a relatively higher MAR

192 • Way of the Turtle

ratio compared with his peers; this would be shown with R-cubed,
since that single event will not have as large an effect on the Rcubed measure. You are more likely to get good test results that
come from lack rather than repeating market behavior which can
be exploited by a trader when you are using nonrobust measures,
and that is yet another reason to use those that are robust.
Using robust measures also helps you avoid overﬁtting because
they are less likely to show large changes caused by small numbers
of events. Consider the effect of the rules added to improve our
Dual Moving Average system in the discussion on overﬁtting. The
rule that was added to cut down the size of the drawdown
improved CAGR% from 41.4 percent to 45.7 percent (10.3 percent) and the MAR ratio from 0.74 to 1.17 (60 percent). In contrast, the robust measure RAR% changes from 53.5 percent to
53.75, or only 0.4 percent; likewise, the robust risk/reward measure R-cubed changes from 3.29 to 3.86, only 17.3 percent. Robust
measures are less likely to show major improvement from changes
in a small number of trades. Therefore, since curve ﬁtting generally beneﬁts only a small number of trades, when you use robust
measures, you are less likely to see major improvements in performance from curve ﬁtting.
Let’s consider a few other factors that affect the reliability of
backtests for predicting system performance in the future.

Representative Samples
Two major factors determine how likely our sample trades and test
results are to be representative of what the future may bring:

On Solid Ground • 193

• Number of markets: Tests run with more markets are more
likely to include markets in various states of volatility and
trendiness.
• Duration of test: Tests run over longer periods will cover
more market states and be more likely to contain sections of
the past that are representative of the future.
I recommend testing all the data to which you have access. It is
much cheaper to buy data than it is to pay for the losses associated
with using a system that you thought worked only because you had
not tested it over a sufﬁcient number of markets or a sufﬁcient number of years. Won’t you feel inept when your system stops working
the ﬁrst time you encounter a market condition that has existed
three or four times in the last 20 years but was not part of your test?
Young traders are particularly susceptible to this sort of mistake.
They think that the conditions they have seen are representative of
those markets in general. They often do not realize how markets
go through phases and change over time, often returning to conditions that previously existed. In trading as in life, the young often
fail to see the value in studying the history that occurred before they
existed. Be young, but don’t be foolish: Study history.
Remember how everyone was a day trader and a genius during
the Internet boom? How many geniuses survived the collapse when
their previously successful methods stopped working? If they had
done some testing, they would have realized that their methods
were dependent on the particular market conditions of that boom,
and so they would have stopped using them when those conditions

194 • Way of the Turtle

were no longer present. Or perhaps they would have employed
robust methods that work well in all conditions.

Sample Size
The concept of sample size is simple: You need a large enough
sample to make valid statistical inferences. The smaller the sample, the rougher the guess provided by those inferences; the larger
the sample, the better the guess provided by those inferences.
There is no magic number; there is only larger is better, smaller is
worse. A sample size of less than 20 will produce a large degree of
error. A sample size of more than 100 is much more likely to have
predictive value. A sample size of several hundred is probably sufﬁcient for most testing. There are speciﬁc formulas and methodologies that will give you speciﬁc answers to the question of how
large a sample is required, but unfortunately, those formulas are
not designed for the types of data encountered in trading, where
we do not have a nice neat distribution of potential outcomes such
as the distribution of women’s height in Figure 4-3.
However, the real challenge does not lie in deciding exactly how
many samples you need. The difﬁculty arises in assessing the inferences from past data when one is considering particular rules that
do not come into effect very often. So, for these types of rules there
is no way to get a large enough sample. Take the behavior of markets at the end of large price bubbles. You can come up with some
speciﬁc rules for those market conditions and even test them, but
you will not have a very large sample on which to base your decisions. In these cases we need to understand that the tests do not tell
us anywhere near as much as they would if we had a much larger

On Solid Ground • 195

sample. The seasonal tendencies I outlined earlier are another area
where this problem arises.
In testing a new rule for a system, you have to try to measure
how many times that particular rule affected the results. If a rule
made a difference only four times during the course of the test,
you do not have a statistical basis for deciding whether that rule
is helping. It is too easy for the effects you see to be random. One
solution to this problem is to ﬁnd ways to generalize the rule
so that it comes into play more often; that will increase the sample size and therefore the statistical descriptive value of tests for
that rule.
There are two common practices that compound the problem
of small sample sizes: single-market optimization and the building
of overly complex systems.
• Single-market optimization: Optimization methods that
are performed separately for each market are much more
difﬁcult to test with a sufﬁcient sample size because a single
market offers much less trading opportunity.
• Complex systems: Complex systems have many rules, and it
becomes very difﬁcult at times to determine how many
times a particular rule may have come into effect or the
degree of that effect. Therefore, it is harder to be conﬁdent
in the statistical descriptive value of tests that are run using a
complex system.
For these reasons, I do not recommend optimizing for single
markets and prefer simple ideas that have stronger statistical
meaning.

196 • Way of the Turtle

Back to the Future
Perhaps one of the most interesting questions in this regard is: How
can you determine what you actually may be able to achieve in real
trading?
The answer to this question makes sense only when you understand the factors that affect performance loss, the need for robust
measures, and the need for a sufﬁcient number of representative
samples. Once you have this, you can start to think about the likely
effect of drift and change in the markets and how even excellent
systems that have been built by experienced traders ﬂuctuate in
terms of their results. The reality is that you do not know and cannot predict how a system will perform. The best you can do is use
tools that provide a sense of the range of potential values and the
factors that affect those values.

Lucky Systems
If a system has performed particularly well in the recent past, it may
have been a matter of luck or there may have been ideal market
conditions for that system. Generally, systems that have done well
tend to have difﬁcult periods after those good periods. Do not
expect to be able to repeat that lucky performance in the future. It
may happen, but do not count on it. You are more likely to experience a period of suboptimal performance.

Parameter Scrambling
A very good exercise one should always perform before considering
trading with any particular system is what I call parameter scrambling. Take a few system parameters and change them by a considerable amount, say, 20 to 25 percent of their value. Pick a point that

On Solid Ground • 197

is considerably down the side of the optimization curves shown in
Figures 12-1 and 12-2. Now look at the results for this test. Using
the Bollinger Breakout system, I decided to see what would happen
when we moved from the optimal values of 350 days and –0.8 for
the exit threshold to 250 days and 0.0 for the exit threshold. This
decreased the RAR% from 59 percent to 58 percent and the Rcubed value from 3.67 to 2.18: A fairly dramatic change. This is just
the sort of dramatic change one might expect to get when going
from testing using historical data to actual trading in the market.

Rolling Optimization Windows
Using rolling optimization windows is another exercise that is more
directly parallel to the experience of going from testing to real trading. To do this, pick a date perhaps 8 or 10 years in the past and then
optimize with all the data before that point, using the same optimization methods you normally would use and making the same sorts
of trade-offs you normally would make, pretending that you have data
available only up to that point. When you have ﬁnished determining
the optimal parameter values, run a simulation of those parameters
using data for the two years after the years of the optimization. How
did the performance for the subsequent several years hold up?
Continue this process with a date a few more years into the
future (about six or eight years in the past). How does this compare
with your original test and the ﬁrst rolling window? How does it
compare with the test using your original parameter values, the
optimal values based on having all the data available? Repeat the
process until you have reached the current time frame.
To illustrate this, I ran an optimization of the Bollinger Breakout system in which I varied each of the three parameters across a

Table 12-4

Rolling Optimization Window Test versus Actual RAR%

Period

MA

Entry

Exit

RAR% Test

RAR% Actual

%

R4 Test

R4 Actual

%

1989 to 1998

280

1.8

–0.8

55.0%

58.5%

6.3%

7.34

5.60

–23.7%

1991 to 2000

280

1.8

–0.5

58.5%

58.8%

0.6%

5.60

5.32

–5.0%

1993 to 2002

260

1.7

–0.7

58.5%

59.3%

1.4%

7.68

3.94

–5.0%

1995 to 2004

290

1.7

–0.6

63.9%

57.7%

–8.3%

5.53

3.90

–29.5%

1997 to 2006

290

1.7

–0.6

55.1%

N/A

N/A

3.90

N/A

N/A

• 198 •

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

On Solid Ground • 199

broad range. I then picked the optimal setting on the basis of the
optimal position, generally near the point where the maximum Rcubed value was achieved. I ran this optimization for ﬁve separate
10-year tests. Table12-4 shows the performance of the rolling optimization for the year after the period indicated.
As you can see from the table, performance varies greatly from
the tested value for each rolling period. Further, the optimal values are different for each time period tested. This illustrates the
imprecision of the testing process and the variability one will
encounter in making the transition from testing to actual trading.

Monte Carlo Simulation
Monte Carlo simulation is one way to determine the robustness of
a system and answer questions such as: “What if the past had been
just slightly different?” and “What might the future bring?” You
could think of it as a way to generate slightly different alternative
universes by using the data from the series of events that represent
the actual past price data.
The term Monte Carlo simulation refers to a general class of
methods that use random numbers to investigate a particular phenomenon. It is most useful with phenomena that are impossible or
difﬁcult to describe with mathematical precision. The name Monte
Carlo comes from the city in Monaco that is famous for gambling
casinos since those casinos offer many games whose outcomes are
determined by random events: roulette, craps, blackjack, and the
like. The method was used during the Manhattan Project by the
scientists who created the atomic bomb, and its name comes from
that era.

200 • Way of the Turtle

Those scientists were trying to determine the ﬁssion characteristics of uranium so that they could determine how much uranium
mass would be necessary to make an atomic bomb. Enriched uranium was incredibly expensive, and so they could not afford to be
wrong in their assessment or they would waste months of time, not
to mention money, if the bomb didn’t explode because there was
not enough uranium. Similarly, if they overestimated and ended
up using more uranium than they needed, it would add months to
the schedule for testing. Unfortunately, the complex interactions
of uranium atoms inside a bomb were impossible to model accurately with the methods of that period and would have required
computing resources that were unavailable until recent times.
To determine the amount of ﬁssionable uranium required, they
needed to know what percentage of the neutrons emitted by an
atom splitting would result in another atom splitting. The famous
physicist Richard Feynman had the insight that they could determine the characteristics of the interactions of particular single neutron by using a team of mathematicians and then could determine
whether that neutron was absorbed by another nucleus or split
another atom. Feynman realized that they could use random numbers to represent the various types of neutrons that would be emitted when an atom split. If that was done thousands of times, they
would be able to look at an accurate distribution of the ﬁssion
characteristics of uranium that would allow them to determine
how much material would be needed. Feynman knew that
although he could not predict the future because the process was
too complex, he could take the parts of the problem he did understand and, using random numbers to simulate neutron properties,
obtain the answer to the problem anyway. So, he could under-

On Solid Ground • 201

stand the nature of the ﬁssion characteristics of uranium without
having to be able to predict exactly what each atom would do at
each point.

Alternative Trading Universes
The markets are even more complex than nuclear ﬁssion reactions.
Markets are composed of the actions of thousands of people who
make decisions on the basis of their own history and brain chemistry, which are much less predictable than neutrons are. Fortunately, as Feynman did with uranium analysis, we can use random
numbers to get a better feel for the potential characteristics of a
trading system even though we cannot predict what the future will
bring. We can examine a set of alternative trading universes that
represent a potential way in which history might have unfolded if
things had been slightly different.
There are two common ways to use Monte Carlo methods to
generate these alternative trading universes:
• Trade scrambling: Randomly changing the order and start
dates of the trades from an actual simulation and then using
the percentage gain or loss from the trades to adjust equity
by using the new scrambled trade order
• Equity curve scrambling: Building new equity curves by
assembling random portions of the original equity curve
Of these two approaches, equity curve scrambling generates
more realistic alternative equity curves because Monte Carlo simulation with random trade reordering tends to understate the possibility of drawdowns.

202 • Way of the Turtle

The periods of maximum drawdown invariably occur at the tail
end of large trends or periods of positive equity increases. At those
times, markets tend to correlate more highly than they normally
do. This is true for futures and stocks. At the end of a large trend
when it breaks down and reverses, it seems that everything moves
against you at once; even markets that normally do not seem correlated become so on those volatile days when a large trend disintegrates.
Because trade scrambling removes the connection between
trades and dates, it also removes the effect on the equity curve
of many trades simultaneously reversing. This means that your
drawdowns show up with less magnitude and frequency in
Monte Carlo simulation than they will in real life. Take a look
at the moves in gold and silver in the spring of 2006. If you happened to test a trend-following system that traded both of those
markets, scrambling the trades would mean that your drawdowns for those two markets would happen at different times,
effectively reducing the effect of each separate drawdown. In
fact, this effect extended to a few other relatively unlikely markets, such as sugar; there was a signiﬁcant period of drawdown
in the sugar market during the 20-day period from mid-May to
mid-June 2006, the same period in which gold and silver were
declining. Thus, trade scrambling is inferior because it understates the drawdowns one is likely to encounter in trading longterm and medium-term systems.
Another example of this phenomenon is the one-day drawdown in the 1987 U.S. stock market crash. On they day of the
large opening gap in eurodollars, many markets that normally
were not correlated also gapped strongly against my positions.

On Solid Ground • 203

Monte Carlo simulation using scrambling of trades tends to
dilute those very real occurrences because it spreads the trades
apart so that they no longer have adverse price movement on the
same days.
Many software packages that implement Monte Carlo simulation offer a way to generate new curves by using equity curve scrambling. However, they do not take into account another important
issue. I also have found through testing and experience that the
periods of bad days at the end of large trends and the magnitude of
those bad days are much worse than one would expect from random events. At those times of major drawdown, the equity curve
for a trend-following system exhibits serial correlation or correlation of one day’s net change with the preceding day’s net changes.
Put more simply, the bad days tend to cluster in a way that one
would not expect to occur randomly.
Using the same recent example of the drawdown in gold, silver,
and sugar in spring 2006, if one scrambled only daily net changes,
the long streak of high-magnitude changes in equity from mid-May
to mid-June would be lost as it would be very unlikely that those
changes would come together if you randomly drew from a distribution or even from the actual equity curve.
To account for this in our simulation software, at Trading Blox
we use equity curve net changes but allow for scrambling by using
multiday chunks of the curve rather than just a single day’s change.
That way the simulated equity curve preserves the grouping of bad
days that one encounters in actual trading. In my testing, I use 20day chunks for equity curve scrambling and ﬁnd that this preserves
the autocorrelation of the equity curve and gives the resulting simulation better real-world predictive value.

204 • Way of the Turtle

Monte Carlo Reports
What can we do with the simulated alternative equity curves that
are generated using Monte Carlo? We can use them to build distributions of the results for a speciﬁc measure to determine the
range of possible values one would see if the future was like any of
the alternative universes we created through the simulation. Figure 12-3 shows a distribution that was created by generating 2,000
simulated alternative universe equity curves, computing the RAR%
for each of those curves, and then plotting the distribution of those
curves on a graph.
The vertical line intersecting the curved line at the top of the
graph shows the RAR% value that 90 percent of the 2,000 simulated equity curves exceeded. In this case, 90 percent of the 2,000
alternative universe curves showed more than 42 percent RAR%.
Graphs like this one are good because they help you realize
that the future is unknown and will come from a set of possibilities. However, one should be very careful not to read too much
into the speciﬁcs of reports like these. Remember that these numbers are taken from an equity curve that is dependent on past data
and therefore suffers from all the potential pitfalls outlined in
Chapter 11. A Monte Carlo simulation does not make a poor test
better since the simulated alternative universe equity curves are
only as good as the historical simulation from which they are
derived. If your RAR% is overstated by 20 percent because of the
effect of the optimization paradox, a Monte Carlo simulation
using the same optimized parameter values still will overstate the
RAR% for the alternative universe equity curves generated in the
simulation.

Monte Carlo RAR%
100%

2000 Iterations
90% Confidence
80%
70%
60%
50%

• 205 •

40%
30%
20%
10%

RAR %

Figure 12-3

Monte Carlo Distribution of RAR%

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

14
0%

13
0%

12
0%

11
0%

10
0%

90
%

80
%

70
%

60
%

50
%

40
%

30
%

20
%

10
%

0%

0%

206 • Way of the Turtle

Some Like It Rough
As the exercises above have demonstrated, a backtest is at best a
rough approximation of what one may expect in the future. Robust
measures are better predictors of future performance than are their
more sensitive counterparts, but the process is still imprecise. Anyone who tells you that you can expect to see a particular level of
performance is lying or does not know what he is talking about. If
he is trying to sell you something, I strongly suspect the former.
Chapter 13 covers some of the methods you can use to make
your trading more robust—that is, less likely to suffer from wild
swings in performance.

thirteen
BULLETPROOF SYSTEMS
Trading is not a sprint; it’s boxing. The market will beat you up,
screw with your head, and do anything it can to defeat you.
But when the bell sounds at the end of the twelfth round,
you must be standing in the ring in order to win.

ew traders who build trading systems are looking for a single
supercharged trading system that demonstrates the best possible results in historical testing. They believe a system that shows superior performance via historical data will indicate similar performance
in future trading. They look at tests showing a system (call it Omega)
that has a 10 percent better CAGR% and a 0.2 better MAR than
another system (call it Alpha) and conclude that they would be foolish to trade with Alpha when Omega seems so much better.
Later, with more experience, one realizes that there is no such
thing as a perfect system. The Omega system might perform better
in certain types of market conditions, and because of the prevalence of the most favorable conditions in the past the Omega system might have outperformed the Alpha system signiﬁcantly in
testing. Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that those conditions
will occur with the same frequency in the future as they did in the

N

• 207 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

208 • Way of the Turtle

past. In other words, the distribution of the types of markets may
be different in the future from what it was in the past. So if the performance differences that were shown in testing between Omega
and Alpha are a result of the particular distribution of types of markets, those differences could disappear if the distribution is different in the future.
Consider this example. Suppose Omega works much better than
Alpha when markets are trending and quiet but Alpha works better when markets are trending and volatile. Now suppose that in
the 20-year test that was done there were 13 years in which the
trends that occurred were predominantly quiet and 7 years in
which the trends were mostly volatile. If the same distribution
occurs in the future, Omega will have better performance.
But what if 5 of the 7 years of volatile trends occurred during the
last 10 years of testing? What if there were changes in market
behavior as a result of trader effects that would result in trends
being more volatile in the future? This might indicate that the
Alpha system would be more likely to have better performance in
the future since it performs better when there are volatile trends.
Conversely, what if the market seemed to indicate a likely cyclical
shift from quiet to volatile markets and back again? Would this not
make it more likely that the Omega system would perform better
in the future as the markets shifted back to more quiet trends from
the period of recent volatile trends?

The Unknowable Future
In many cases, the reality is that we simply do not have enough information to make these sorts of decisions with any certainty. The rea-

Bulletproof Systems • 209

son for this is that we do not have enough data. Consider the
sequence QQQVVQ. If this sequence represents the periods of quiet
versus volatile markets, can one determine with any reliability the
relative probability of future markets being volatile or quiet? If you
were paying attention in earlier chapters, you’d realize that a sample
size of six is not enough to draw any certain conclusions. Even if we
have a larger sequence such as VQQVQVVQQQQVVQ, it may
appear that there is a cycle, but there is not enough data for us to
make that assessment with any reliability.
In these cases, it is best to come to terms with the fact that we
do not have enough data and therefore do not know what the future
will bring; therefore, we cannot predict the relative performance of
systems in the future accurately except in very broad terms. A
mature understanding of this reality is critical to building a robust
trading program. As is the case with many aspects of trading, seeing the truth is a crucial ﬁrst step. Once you see it, you can make
decisions that reﬂect that truth and adjust your actions accordingly.

Robust Trading
Robust trading is about building a trading program that will perform
well no matter what the future brings. It is founded on accepting
the reality that no one can know the future and that there is a very
large margin of error inherent in any testing based on historical data.
Ironically, you will ﬁnd that your trading performance becomes
more predictable, once you build a trading program that takes into
account the unknowable nature of the future, The reason for this
seeming paradox is simple: If your trading program is built on the
premise that the future is unknowable, you are assured that the

210 • Way of the Turtle

future will bring conditions that your trading program anticipated,
something you did not predict. In contrast, a trading program built
on the assumption of a particular set of market characteristics—
almost any assumption at all, in fact—will suffer if the conditions
on which the program is based are not present.
So how do you build a trading program that is not dependent on
particular market conditions? There are two major attributes in any
robust trading program: diversity and simplicity. Nature provides
the best example of how these factors increase robustness. A strong
analogy can be made between the survival ability of an ecosystem
and individual species within that system and the robustness of a
trading program.

Diversity
At the level of the ecosystem, nature does not rely on one or two
species to perform a task. It does not have only one type of predator, only one food source, only one herbivore, or only one scavenger to clean up the remains of the dead. Diversity is important
because it insulates the ecosystem from the effects of radical change
in the population of one of the species.

Simplicity
Complex ecosystems are more resilient, and complex species seem
to have signiﬁcant advantages over simpler ones when the environment is stable. However, during times of change, complex species
are more likely to die off. At those times, the hardiest species are those
which are very simple, such as viruses and bacteria. Simple organisms are hardier because they are less dependent on their speciﬁc
surroundings. That simplicity is signiﬁcantly beneﬁcial when the

Bulletproof Systems • 211

ecosystem is subjected to major change such as that which might
occur if a large meteor struck the earth or a large volcano eruption
caused a major drop in temperatures. When the climate changes,
dependency on the previous climate is a signiﬁcant disadvantage.

Robust Organisms
There are some species that are complex but still are robust, or able
to survive in varying conditions. Those species generally developed
in climates or conditions where they were subjected to constant
change and therefore developed an ability to survive during those
changes. Those robust species serve as a model that can be used to
develop systems that are robust.
Now that we have considered the two building blocks of robustness in nature—diversity and simplicity—let’s examine ways to add
them to a trading program. Simplicity can be added by minimizing the rules that create dependencies on speciﬁc market conditions. Diversity can be added by trading as many markets as possible
that do not correlate with one another. It also can be added by trading many different types of systems at the same time so that no matter what market conditions the future brings, there will be some
systems in your portfolio that are performing well.

Robust Systems
The primary ways to make systems more robust is to have rules that
allow those systems to adapt to different market conditions and to keep
the systems simple and less susceptible to changes in the market.
You can build systems that are more robust by making them
adapt to market conditions as those conditions change. This

212 • Way of the Turtle

approach is analogous to those complex organisms in nature that
are able to survive in varying conditions because of their superior
adaptability. A human being is one example. People are able to survive in the deserts of the Sahara and the ice of the Arctic because
they have the brain power that allows them to adapt to those very
different environments.
Any system will perform better under certain market conditions.
Trend-following systems do better when markets are trending and
quiet; countertrend systems do better when markets are stable and
volatile. A portfolio ﬁlter is a rule that can make a system more
robust because it can ﬁlter out markets when a particular market
is not in a state that is favorable for a particular system. The
Donchian Trend system, for example, has a portfolio ﬁlter. It does
not allow trades when the market is breaking out against the trend,
as this occurs only when the market is not in a favorable state. A
breakout in the direction of the trend occurs more often in trending markets. The addition of this ﬁlter makes the system more
robust.
In a similar manner, simple rules make systems more robust
because those rules work in a greater variety of circumstances.
Complex systems generally are complex because they have been
designed to take advantage of some conditions or market behavior
that was noticed during system development. The more those rules
are added, the more the system becomes tied to a more speciﬁc set
of market conditions and behaviors. This makes it likelier that the
future will produce markets that don’t have those particular behaviors or in which the rules no longer work as well.
Simple rules that are built on more durable concepts will hold
up in actual trading better than will complex rules that are tailored

Bulletproof Systems • 213

to more speciﬁc market behavior. Keep your systems simple and
you will ﬁnd that they hold up better over time.

Market Diversiﬁcation
One of the most effective ways to improve the robustness of your
overall trading is to include a diverse range of markets. If you trade
more markets, you increase the chance that you will encounter
conditions favorable to your trading system in at least one of those
markets. In the case of trend-following systems, if you trade more
markets, you boost the odds that for any particular period there will
be a trend in one of those markets.
This means that you want to have a portfolio that includes as
many markets as possible. The markets should present new opportunities, and so they should not be highly correlated to other markets. For example, there are several short-term U.S. interest-rate
products that move almost in lockstep. Adding more than one of
these products to your portfolio will not add diversity.
If you are trading systems that do not require close monitoring,
you should consider trading foreign markets. Those markets can add
a lot of diversiﬁcation and help make your trading more robust and
consistent. Any of the systems shown here that buy on the open
based on closing price data will be relatively easy to trade on markets around the world because the time-zone differences are less
important if you have to worry about only market closes and opens.

Deciding Which Markets to Trade
At this time, the most popular platform for testing systems,
TradeStation, has the extreme limitation of being unable to test

214 • Way of the Turtle

more than one market at a time. One side effect of this is that many
traders think in terms of markets, not portfolios. This has led to the
erroneous belief that some markets should not be included in a
trend-following portfolio because those markets are not proﬁtable
or because they underperform compared with others.
There are two problems with this perspective. First, trends may
happen only every several years in some markets, and so short tests
of 5 or 10 years will not show the market’s full potential. Second,
the beneﬁt of diversiﬁcation for a market may outweigh any negative proﬁtability.
Consider the cocoa market example from Chapter 4. Recall
how that market had a long string of losing trades before there
was a good trend. This is very common. Here’s an example from
my Turtle days that is particularly noteworthy. In the early part
of 1985 Rich told us we no longer could trade coffee. I think he
felt that there was not enough volume for us to trade it and we
had been consistently losing money with it. That decision caused
us to lose out on what would have been our single biggest trade
(see Figure 13-1).
Since I did not take that trade, I can’t tell you exactly what I
would have made from memory, and so I performed a test using
the data from the March 1986 coffee contract. At the time of entry,
the value for N was 1.29 cents. This meant that I would have been
trading a unit size of 103 contracts since I traded a $5 million
account for all of 1985. Because we traded four units at a time, I
would have been long 412 contracts of coffee for that trade. The
proﬁt would have been approximately $34,000 per contract. The
aggregate proﬁt for the trade would have been 412 times $34,000,
or approximately $14 million, representing a 280 percent return on

Bulletproof Systems • 215

KC: Coffee-CSCE
280

260

240

Exit
234.37

220

200

180

160

140

Entry
141.91
Initial Stop
139.16

86
n
Ja

D

ec

19

19

85

85
19
ov
N

O

Se

ct

p

19

19

85

85

120

Enter Long
1985-10-10 Day

Figure 13-1

Exit 65 bars
1986-01-16 Open

The Coffee Trade We Missed

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

the $5 million account for a single trade. No other trade from the
Turtle era came close to being as big as this trade that we missed.
Does this mean that one should trade all markets? Are there no
good reasons to exclude particular markets from trading? The primary
reason for not trading a particular market is liquidity. Markets that do
not have active trading and sufﬁcient volume can be much harder to
trade. The more successful you become, the more this becomes a limiting factor. It was the reason Rich kept us out of the coffee trade.
When you combined our trading sizes with Rich’s, we were trading
thousands of contracts in coffee when we entered and exited. That
was certainly at the edge of viable volume limits. Therefore, Rich’s
decision was a very rational one, though one I wished he had not
made before the coffee trade discussed above materialized.

216 • Way of the Turtle

You may be thinking that you can trade an illiquid market if you
have a small account size. This may be true depending on the type
of system you are using, but it may be wrong. The problem with
illiquid markets is not that you cannot get in and out most of the
time. The problem is that in certain circumstances you can have
many orders and no traders to take the other side. Illiquid markets
mean few buyers and sellers. So your single contract buy order
may be sitting in a pack of 200 to 500 contracts to buy when there
are no sellers at all. This does not happen as often in more liquid
markets.
Illiquid markets are also more susceptible to price shocks. Take
at look at the charts for rough rice, lumber, propane, and any market that trades less than a few thousand shares a day and compare
the number of large one-day moves with that in more liquid markets. You will ﬁnd that there are many more days with large unexpected price moves in the illiquid markets.

Different Types of Markets
There is another reason you might choose to exclude certain markets from your trading. Although I don’t believe that one should
exclude certain markets because they have not been as proﬁtable
as others when tested in a simulation, I do believe that there are
some fundamental differences between certain classes of markets
that warrant the exclusion of an entire class from trading with a particular class of systems.
Some traders believe that various individual markets are different and should be treated as such. I think the reality is more complicated. I believe that there are actually three classes of markets
that behave distinctly differently but that within those classes the

Bulletproof Systems • 217

differences between markets are attributable largely to random
events. The major classes of markets are as follows:
1. Fundamentals-driven markets. These are markets such as
currencies and interest rates in which the trading is not the
primary force behind the movement; larger macroeconomic
events and forces drive the price. As time goes on this seems
to be less and less true, but I would argue that the Federal
Reserve or a country-speciﬁc equivalent and a country’s
monetary policy still inﬂuence prices more than do
speculators in the currency and interest rate markets. These
markets have the greatest liquidity with the cleanest trends
and are the easiest for trend followers to trade.
2. Speculator-driven markets. These are markets such as
stocks and futures such as coffee, gold, silver, and crude
oil in which speculators inﬂuence the markets more than
governments or large hedgers do. The prices are
perception-driven. These markets are harder for trend
followers to trade.
3. Aggregated derivative markets. These are markets in which
the driving force is speculation, but that speculation is
diluted because the traded instruments are derivative of
other markets that are themselves aggregations of individual
component stocks. A good example is the e-mini S&P
futures contract. It moves up and down, but its range is
constrained by the underlying S&P 500 index. The S&P
index in turn moves only indirectly because of speculators.
Since an index aggregates the purely speculative moves of
many stocks, there is an averaging out and a dilution of

218 • Way of the Turtle

momentum. These markets are the hardest ones for trend
followers to trade.
My proposition is this: Markets in any of these classes trade the
same way. You should trade them or not according to liquidity and
class only. As a Turtle I decided not to trade class 3 at all, whereas
many of the Turtles chose to trade that class of markets. I felt our
systems were not good for derivative aggregated markets. It is not
that you can’t trade them, just that they just cannot be traded as well
with a medium-term breakout trend-following system like the one
we traded; so, I never traded the S&P as a Turtle.
Markets in each of the classes behave similarly. Although you
certainly will see periods, perhaps years or decades, of differences,
you will ﬁnd that over the long run this is simply the reﬂection of
trader memory and the relative rarity and random nature of underlying fundamental causes for large trends.

Trader Memory
A good example of trader memory is gold and silver. When I ﬁrst
started trading, it was impossible to make any money in gold
because the memory of the enormous 1978 trend (when gold went
to $900 an ounce and silver went to over $50 an ounce) was still
too fresh in people’s minds. Every time the price even started to
look like a potential up trend, everyone and his brother would start
buying gold. That made the price movements very choppy. The
price would run up and run down and then run up and run down
again. In short, it was very hard to trade as a trend follower. Now,
20 years later, most people do not remember the 1978 trend anymore, and so the move in the spring of 2006 was much easier to

Bulletproof Systems • 219

trade than it had been earlier; if you looked at the charts, you would
say that gold had changed its character.
I do not think one can tell when the next market such as gold is
going to change or when the next market such as cocoa is going to
trend again. The fact that a market has not had a large trend in the
last 20 years does not make it a bad market to trade. For me, if a
market has enough volume to trade and is different from the other
markets in your portfolio, you should trade that market.
The constraint to market diversiﬁcation is often the amount of
capital required to trade many markets within acceptable risk limits. This is one of the reasons successful hedge fund operators have
an easier time than do individual traders and why large traders have
more consistent performance than do smaller traders. If you can
afford to trade only 10 markets, you can expect more erratic performance than will be the case if you can afford to trade 50 or 60
markets simultaneously. It takes at least $100,000 to trade a longterm trend-following system using futures contracts with reasonable
diversiﬁcation. Even at that level the risk required would be too
high for most traders.

System Diversiﬁcation
In addition to diversifying across markets, you can increase the
robustness of your trading program by diversifying your systems.
Using more than one system at a time can make a trading program
signiﬁcantly more robust, especially if the systems are signiﬁcantly
different.
Consider two systems. The better one has an RAR% of 38.2 percent with an R-cubed of 1.19, and the worse one has an RAR% of

220 • Way of the Turtle

14.5 percent and an R-cubed of 0.41. If you tested both systems,
which one would you trade? Would you trade only the better one?
That seems the logical choice.
However, that choice ignores the beneﬁts of diversiﬁcation when
the systems are not correlated. Those beneﬁts are even greater
when the systems are negatively correlated (i.e., one tends to make
money when the other one is losing money). That is the case with
particular systems that provide very signiﬁcant beneﬁts when they
are combined, as you will see below.
Trading both systems at the same time has an RAR% of 61.2 percent and an R-cubed of 5.20. Needless to say, that is a signiﬁcant
improvement over the performance of either system alone.
The systems mentioned above are actually the two parts of the
Bollinger Breakout system. The better system trades only long
volatility channel breakouts, and the worse system trades only short
volatility channel breakouts. It is fairly easy to understand why these
systems work well when combined, but the improvement in performance is quite dramatic.
One can get the same beneﬁts by combining systems that work
well in different market conditions, such as one that performs well
in trending markets and another that works well in markets when
there are no trends. When one is suffering a drawdown, the other
one may be proﬁtable, and vice versa. This does not always work
out as smoothly as one might hope, but you can improve the robustness of your trading program greatly with approaches like this.
As with market diversiﬁcation, the limit to system diversiﬁcation
is that it often requires signiﬁcant capital or management effort to
trade many systems at the same time. This is one of the reasons successful hedge fund operators have an easier time than do individ-

Bulletproof Systems • 221

ual traders. It may require $200,000 to diversify a long-term trendfollowing system adequately. Trading four or ﬁve different systems
may require as much as $1 million or more. This factor alone may
cause many people to decide to place their money with a good professional trader who runs a commodity pool or hedge fund rather
than trade for their own accounts privately.

Facing Reality
A robust trading program is built on the premise that you cannot
predict the speciﬁc market conditions you will encounter in your
actual trading. Robust trading accounts for this by building systems
that are robust because they are adaptable or simple and are not
speciﬁcally dependent on market conditions. A mature robust trading program trades many different systems in many different markets and is much more likely to perform consistently in the future
than is a program that trades a small number of systems that have
been highly tailored to a small number of markets.

This page intentionally left blank

fourteen
MASTERING YOUR
DEMONS
The market does not care how you feel. It will not prop up your ego or
console you when you are down. Therefore, trading is not for everyone.
If you are unwilling to face the truth about the markets and the truth
about your own limitations, fears, and failures, you will not succeed.

hope that some of you may be as inspired by the Turtle story as
I was when I ﬁrst read about the great speculator Jesse Livermore
in Edwin Lefèvre’s Reminiscences of a Stock Operator in 1982. The
fact that Richard Dennis was able to teach a group of traders in two
weeks and then have them go on to earn more than $100 million
for him over the next four years has become one of trading’s most
compelling stories. The success of the Turtle experiment has
proven that Richard had a set of teachable principles that if followed consistently would result in proﬁtable trading.
The funny thing is that most of the principles that Richard
Dennis taught us were not new. Some were basic principles that
had been espoused by other famous traders since before Richard
was born. Yet the very simplicity of the principles we were taught

I

• 223 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

224 • Way of the Turtle

in some respects was a hindrance for those of us who tried to follow them in those initial months.
People have a tendency to believe that complicated ideas are better than simple ones. Many ﬁnd it hard to comprehend that
Richard Dennis could have made several hundred million dollars
by using a handful of simple rules. It is natural to think that he must
have had some secret. Many of the Turtles fought that demon during our ﬁrst few months of trading. Some of us thought that trading successfully couldn’t possibly be that simple; that there must
be something else to it. This type of thinking obstructed some of
the Turtles’ trading so much that they never were able to follow the
straightforward rules Richard had outlined.
My theory is that this belief and the need for complication come
from insecurity and the resulting need to ﬁnd some reason to feel special in some way. Having secret knowledge makes us feel special; possessing simple truths does not. Therefore, our egos drive us to believe
that we possess some kind of special knowledge to prove to ourselves
that we are somehow superior to others. Our egos don’t want us to
limit ourselves to commonly known truths. The ego wants secrets.

Live By the Ego, Die By the Ego
This is the major reason why beginning traders are drawn to discretionary trading. Discretionary trading feeds the ego; it is trading
that relies on one’s judgment, in contrast with systematic trading,
where trading decisions are made by using rules that specify exactly
when and how much to buy and sell. So when you use your judgment to trade and you win, the ego wins. You can then brag to your
friends how you are the master of the markets.

Mastering Your Demons • 225

I see this particular behavior constantly on online trading
forums—especially the broad-based ones that attract new traders.
You regularly see posts from individuals bragging about how they
bought just before a run-up, or they have found the Holy Grail and
have a 90 percent accurate system, or they have been trading for
three months and have made 200 percent. They invariably have
done this by trading with too much leverage, so they might have
turned $5,000 into $15,000; however, they run a very high risk of
losing that $15,000 because they are trading too aggressively. A few
months later, you may see the same traders post that they have
blown up their account and lost everything. These individuals were
trading to feed their egos, and as the saying goes, live by the ego,
die by the ego.
There are many successful discretionary traders, but there are
far more unsuccessful ones. The biggest reason for this is that the
ego is not your friend as a trader. The ego wants to be right, it
wants to predict, and it wants to know secrets. The ego makes it
much more difﬁcult to trade well by avoiding the cognitive biases
that hinder proﬁts.
An example from the Turtle days will bring this point home.

The Great Ping-Pong Battle
Some people may ﬁnd this hard to believe since trading seems like a
very exciting job to outsiders, but most of the time when we were
trading we did absolutely nothing. We were bored. The markets were
quiet most of the time. In short, the Turtles had a lot of free time on
their hands.

226 • Way of the Turtle

Fortunately, we had a Ping-Pong table, and so Ping-Pong was
our game. Almost all of us played it at least once a day. We played
so much that one day we had a note posted to our door from someone in the large insurance ofﬁce adjacent to ours threatening our
deaths because they did not like the fact that we got to play games
all day while they had to do work (presumably they did not like
their work).
I had never played the game seriously before, but I soon developed reasonable skills and started beating some of the better players after a few months. I adopted the Chinese-style pen hold grip,
which allowed me to switch between forehand and backhand more
easily—that was better for my aggressive spin-ﬁlled style.
But there was one Turtle who was much better than any of the
rest of us, one we all knew we could not beat. He had been playing
for a long time, and we all watched in awe when he played. He generally had no problems beating us 21 to 10 or by an even larger
margin, and we knew he was just toying with us. He beat us without
breaking a sweat.
After a few months of play, one of the Turtles suggested that we
have a tournament. In a group full of competitive traders, this was
serious stuff. We all felt that the tournament probably would really
be about who was second best since there was no doubt who was
the best player; however, we wanted to see who would be champ.
When the tournament began, the weaker players were weeded out
one by one until we were down to the strongest eight players. With
the exception of the best player, we were all pretty close in skills.
I decided to change my style for the tournament. Instead of
going for kill shots whenever I had a chance the way I normally did,

Mastering Your Demons • 227

I played conservatively. I even changed my grip from the pen hold to
the more accurate traditional style (the way one holds a tennis
racket) and my paddle from the spongy ones that give lots of spins
to the sandpaper ones that are better for defense since they are less
responsive to the spin of the opponent. I knew that the best player
had superior spin technique and would not have any problem handling my comparatively feeble spins so if I were to do well against
him I was better off with a paddle that weakened his advantage of
superior spin technique.
My strategy paid off as I slowly beat my next two opponents in
close and exciting matches. That meant that we were now down to
two players and I would be playing in the championship round
against a much superior player, the one we all expected to win the
tournament. I would have to play my best game and he would have
to break for me to win, and we all knew it. All the Turtles were present for this ﬁnal match, which pitted youth and energy against experience and skill.
As we started to play, I noticed something: My opponent really
wanted to win the match; he was taking it very seriously. It was
obvious that it was very important for him to win. He had much to
lose since he was already considered the superior player, already
counted as the best. In contrast, I had nothing to lose. I already had
won the tournament as the rest of us saw it. No one expected me to
win or even thought that I could win.
He won the ﬁrst few points pretty easily, in fact, so easily that I
began to worry that I might get shut out, skunked. But as I adapted
to his superior speed and shot placement and played extremely
defensively, I started to wear him out. He was playing more aggres-

228 • Way of the Turtle

sively than he normally would have because he wanted to ﬁnish me
off quickly. I was playing more conservatively because I knew it was
my only chance. I started to get longer volleys before he won the
point, and then I ﬁnally started to win points—not many at ﬁrst but
just enough to keep me in the game. As I began to win more and
more points, my opponent’s play suffered. He started to become
angry with himself for letting an inferior player gain any sort of
advantage.
Slowly the advantage tipped in my favor, and I started coming
back in the second game of the match. I clawed my way back to
even and then went on to win that game. So at the end of the ﬁrst
two games we were tied one to one, but the momentum was in my
favor with one game to play.
The ﬁnal game was a battle. We fought back and forth with the
game tied and with each of us being one point from victory on several occasions. Finally, I hit the last shot and he missed. In the end,
the pressure of the tournament, of proving that he was the better
player, got to him and he cracked. He was assuredly the best player.
I knew it and he knew it, but in the end that didn’t matter, and he
lost because he couldn’t handle the pressure. The win meant too
much to him, and that affected his play.
My superior opponent was also not successful in the Turtle program. I believe this was the case for the same reason that he lost
the Ping-Pong tournament. His ego was too tied up in his own trading for him to be able to see that the reasons for his poor performance were inside him. Not coincidentally, the Ping-Pong expert was
the same Turtle who believed that Rich had given me secrets that he
had not been given. It was too hard for him to see that the reason I

Mastering Your Demons • 229

was making money when he was losing was that I was trading better than he was because I was focusing on the rules and blotting out
any ego issues. He blamed it on not having been given the secrets.
He did not want to face the truth.

Humble Pie,The Best Food for Traders
If you want to be a great trader, you must conquer your ego and
develop humility. Humility allows you to accept the future as something that is unknowable. Humility will keep you from trying to
make predictions. Humility will keep you from taking it personally
when a trade goes against you and you exit with a loss. Humility will
let you embrace trading that is based on simple concepts because
you won’t have a need to know secrets so that you can feel special.

Don’t Be an Ass
Although I had an easier time than most, perhaps all, of the Turtles, I don’t want to give the impression that I am some sort of egoless automaton who was immune to the cognitive biases and a
master of my own psychology. I was not. Here’s a case in point.
Sometime during our second year we were in a big move, and I
once again was loaded with the maximum four units we were
allowed as part of the rules. I asked a few of the other Turtles how
many units they were in, and several of them did not have the full
four-unit position. That meant that they were not making as much
money as they should have been. Thus, my asking them about their
positions was a bit like rubbing their noses in it.
Later that day, like almost every day, I left to catch a commuter
train since I lived in the western suburb of Riverside, Illinois. Sev-

230 • Way of the Turtle

eral of the other Turtles commuted by train as well, and we all
would leave at about the same time. I remember opening the door
and entering the hallway to hear one of the guys who had left a bit
earlier say to the other something like, “Did you hear him today?
What an ass.”
The thing is they were right. I had been an ass: the worst kind
of ass, the clueless dolt who had been one without realizing it. I
had not stopped to consider how my actions were affecting the others. Upon the briefest reﬂection, it was obvious that I had been
cruel to brag about having something that they did not. I am sure
that it was all the more bitter to have those careless remarks come
from a young punk barely out of high school.
I have thought about that day many times over the last 20-plus
years since I overhead that bit of conversation. It was the day that
I vowed to try to never be an ass again, to spend a little more time
thinking about how what I do and say could affect others before I
acted. I also try to be a bit more tolerant of the clueless asses I
encounter on occasion, mindful of the fact that I too am one from
time to time.

Finding Consistency
The most important lessons in life are simple yet difﬁcult to execute. In trading, consistency is the key. A systematic trading
approach, a thorough understanding of the limitations of that
approach, and the tools used to build trading systems can help you
be more successful and constant. You must be consistent to trade
well. You must be able to execute your plan or the plan has no
meaning.

Mastering Your Demons • 231

If I had to pick the single X factor most responsible for our success as Turtles, it would be the fact that we were taught by a legendary trader. This knowledge gave us a faith in the methods that
Richard taught us, making it much easier for us to follow his rules
consistently and persistently. Unless you can ﬁnd another famous
trader to teach you and give you the same conﬁdence, you will have
to ﬁnd that faith on your own. You will have to develop conﬁdence
in your methods as well as in your ability to make money over time
using those methods.
The best way I know to develop faith in systematic approaches
to trading is to explore some systems on your own using trading simulation software. The software will let you look at the past in the
same way that actual trading does. You will ﬁnd the process of
researching various trading systems and checking your assumptions
against actual market data to be a humbling one. If you start actual
trading, you may ﬁnd it to be much harder than you might have
thought. Putting real money on the line is not the same as practicing or paper trading.
If you are considering a career in trading, you must keep one
important fact in mind, and that is that I am very unusual. By
some freak of biology or upbringing, it was not difﬁcult for me to
be consistent in my trading. My psychological makeup made it
easy for me to repel cognitive biases. So, although I have seen the
effects of psychological breakdown and weakness in traders, I am
not the best counselor for anyone who needs help overcoming his
particular issues because it is not something that I had to rise
above myself.
Another thing to consider is that I am not an expert in trading
psychology. For these reasons, although I have been able to observe

232 • Way of the Turtle

ﬁrsthand the importance of psychological strength, I cannot offer
speciﬁc advice on how to build it beyond what is contained in this
book. Fortunately, there are others who have made a study of such
psychology and are able to offer speciﬁc advice to those who may
have a more difﬁcult time trading than I did. Many have found the
writings of Van Tharp, Brett Steenbarger, Ari Kiev, and Mark
Douglas helpful in their own efforts to master their trading demons.
I encourage you to consider those sources.
Finally, my experience primarily has been as a trend follower. I
have explored and traded other styles, including day trading and
swing trading, and so I know that the principles outlined in this
book apply to those types of trading as well. Do not take my focus
on trend following to imply that this is the best way to trade. In fact,
trend following is probably not for most people. Each style requires
a particular psychological makeup that you may or may not possess. Matching your personality with its strengths and weaknesses
against a particular trading style is very important, and several of
the authors mentioned above can speak more authoritatively on
this subject.

Lessons from the Turtles
1. Trade with an edge: Find a trading strategy that will produce
positive returns over the long run because it has a positive
expectation.
2. Manage risk: Control risk so that you can continue to trade or
you may not be around to see the beneﬁts of a positive expectation system.

Mastering Your Demons • 233

3. Be consistent: Execute your plan consistently to achieve the
positive expectation of your system.
4. Keep it simple: Simple systems hold up better over time than do
more complex ones.

Remember that a plan means nothing if it is not acted on. If you
really want to be a successful trader, commit yourself to the ﬁrst
step. I did, and I’ve never regretted it.

This page intentionally left blank

epilogue
WHEN ALL IS
SAID AND DONE
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I—
I took the one less traveled by,
And that has made all the difference.
—Robert Frost

spent a great deal of time over the last few months focusing on
the ﬁrst part of this book because I wanted it be an apt introduction to the epilogue. It was this last chapter that I was most
enthusiastic about completing.
Once you have lived the life of a trader—lived as a Turtle—the
trader’s philosophy permeates the rest of your experience. As you
work through and see your way around cognitive biases and make
adjustments for them in your thinking as it relates to the markets,
you start to do the same thing in other areas of your life. One of
the ways in which good traders differ from those who are less successful is that they are not afraid to be different, to do something
unlike what everyone else is doing, to take their own path.

I

• 235 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

236 • Way of the Turtle

Take Your Own Path
I was 19 years old when I decided to become a trader. I was conﬁdent of my potential success and told some of my closest friends
that I would be a millionaire by age 21. I was not bragging as much
as sharing my hope for being successful in trading. It was new to
me, and it fascinated me. I made a commitment to trading even
though that meant dropping out of college. My father, who did not
have a college degree and felt that had held him back in his career,
was not pleased. But I have always been an individualist, unafraid
to voice my opinions, unafraid to disagree with authority, and so I
did not really care what everyone else thought; I knew it was the
right decision for me. My independence and outspokenness have
gotten me into trouble at times; I’m sure this has worried my
mother on numerous occasions, but it has served me well.
It is hard to imagine what life would have been like if I had not
decided to drop everything else to become a trader. I certainly
would not have responded to Richard Dennis’s ad in the paper.
Now I see life as a trader approaches his craft: Nothing ventured,
nothing gained. Risk is your friend. Don’t be afraid of it. Understand it. Control it. Dance with it. Traders take chances with good
expectation but expect to lose regularly. They are not hesitant to
act because they’re afraid that they might be wrong, a quality that
emerges in the kind of life they lead. They follow their own path
and don’t worry that sometimes they will fail in certain attempts
because they know that is part of life; they understand that failure
is a necessary prerequisite to success and learning.
I always have enjoyed extreme challenges and attempted to do
things that most people consider foolish, impractical, or impossible. I see possibilities where many people see obstacles and am

When All Is Said and Done • 237

compelled to pursue those opportunities. I have failed in this many
times, but I also have succeeded with each experience and learned
something new.
If people asked me what my goal was, I would answer: “To make
the world a better place, of course.” I think the power lies in all of
us to make the world better in some concrete way, however small.
That is a worthy objective. I would be far richer and more “successful” if I had stuck to trading and never ventured into anything
new. Some of the other Turtles did that and have been wildly successful running hedge funds with hundreds of millions or even billions of dollars under management. Similarly, if I had stuck with a
particular niche in the software industry, I might be more successful, at least as others measure success.
True to my nature, I don’t care about others’ opinions of my success. They are not going to be the ones at my deathbed wondering
whether I made a difference, whether I lived well and fully. I am.

The Track to Nowhere
Most of my oldest friends think I am going through some sort of
prolonged midlife crisis. I probably seem irresponsible and unconventional to them. If having a midlife crisis means examining your
life and deciding that you don’t want to live by a set of success criteria created by society and the media, I am guilty as charged. I
highly recommend having one if you haven’t done so already. The
alternative is much less interesting.
I constantly meet people who have lost themselves in an empty
pursuit of what they ought to do. In an effort to please their parents
and teachers, to get a good job, to make a lot of money, and so on,

238 • Way of the Turtle

they followed a path set out by others rather than one they chose
for themselves. For some, this started in grammar school; for others, it happened as late as college or perhaps shortly after they
started their ﬁrst real jobs and began to take on responsibilities.
Invariably, the path took them far from their dreams and what they
had hoped they would become. They lost sight of the fact that they
had a choice: They could decide at any time to do something
else—decide perhaps to step off the path and explore the world and
themselves a bit.
In many companies there is a word for this path. It is called a
career track, or track for short. That is a good analogy because a
train engineer cannot decide what route to take; those decisions
are made by the people who set out the track and those who control the switches along the way. I have been thinking about this phenomenon quite a bit lately, and it occurs to me that the reason most
people don’t follow their dreams is that they are afraid of failing in
their endeavors. They believe it is better to follow a predetermined
path that they know they can achieve rather than one of their own
making where they will be tested.
I don’t believe that anyone consciously makes this decision; it
happens by default or through lack of action. People do not say to
themselves: “I’d really like a boring job working for a company I
hate.” It just happens.
They step onto the track without realizing it. Then, once they
are on it, it takes a conscious effort to leave it. Otherwise they will
end up wherever it leads, which is probably not where they wanted
to go. Since they did not step consciously onto the track, they may
not even realize where they are until they ﬁnd themselves very far
away from their dreams.

When All Is Said and Done • 239

Our individual accomplishments are limited far more by the
bounds of what we consider to be impossible than by objective reality. If we don’t take a certain step because we don’t believe we will
succeed, we have placed a barrier in front of that success that is far
stronger than reality. If we try, we may fail—but we may succeed.
If we never try at all, we make it impossible to succeed.

Learning Requires Failure
Besides, failure is not so bad. The Dalai Lama has said that you
should thank your enemies because they teach you more than your
friends and family do. Failure is one such enemy, and a very powerful one at that. I know because I have failed more often and in a
greater variety of attempts than anyone I know. I also have had
some spectacular successes that I would not have experienced if I
had not been willing to risk failing. I’ll take that a step further and
admit that I’ve learned far more from my mistakes and failures than
from any of my accomplishments. You cannot learn without risking failure. That’s part of the reason I’ve experienced my share of
failure: I like to learn new things. Learning requires failure; you
won’t learn if you are not willing to make mistakes and fail.
Most people believe that as we get older it gets harder to learn,
that our brains change somehow. They point to children and how
quickly they learn to speak a new language and contrast that with
how hard it is for adults to learn a new language, crediting youth
as the X factor. I believe the big difference in the ability for children to learn a new language as opposed to adults is that kids are
not afraid of sounding foolish or of making mistakes in grammar
and pronunciation while adults are terriﬁed of this.

240 • Way of the Turtle

I recently moved to Buenos Aires, Argentina and have become
friendly with a number of students of all ages and nationalities who
are here to study Spanish. One of the most interesting things I have
noticed is that some who have been in the country for only a few
months or weeks are able to converse at a basic level even though
they did not have any background in the language before their
arrival. Others may have studied Spanish for years in school but
cannot speak conversationally even after several weeks of intensive
classes and residence in Buenos Aires.
This difference in learning is due almost entirely to the degree
of fear they feel about making mistakes or sounding foolish. Some
do not care how they sound; they just start conversing. They realize that everyone who learns a language errs at times and that this
is part of the process. They let themselves fail and improve with the
experience. Each time someone looks at them with a blank stare
in response to what was said, they learn. They learn each time they
order a meal and do not get what they thought they had requested.
These students do so well at failing and learning that they now can
converse ﬂuently in Spanish, and they will continue to improve
their speaking skills with daily practice.

Changing Paths
If you ﬁnd yourself on the wrong path—a track leading you somewhere you don’t want to go—keep in mind our discussion of the
sunk cost effect. Do not worry about how much time you’ve spent
on a career you don’t like or how much you have invested in a relationship that you know will not work. A trader knows not to hide
from reality. She knows that when the market indicates that a trade

When All Is Said and Done • 241

is not working, that is not the time to hope for a change, wish that
things were different, or pretend that reality is different; it is the
time to exit the trade.
Reality has a way of persisting despite our best attempts to wish
it away. Turtles embrace reality rather than trying to avoid it. This
makes it easier to change directions when we ﬁnd that things are
not as we hoped or expected. We don’t complain, we don’t worry,
we don’t hope; we do something concrete to adjust to our new perception of reality.

On Money
I think it is easier to make a lot of money if you don’t really want it
badly. This is especially true for traders. I remember that one of the
Turtles was strongly affected by the large ﬂuctuations in equity that
would come from market moves when we had large positions. Making a lot of money was very important to him. At one point I returned
from vacation and found out that he had destroyed his telephone
because he was so angry that the market had moved against us.
I don’t think it was a coincidence that he had trouble following
the system. I think that his desire to make a lot of money made it
harder for him to execute the systems we were trading consistently.
I was successful at least partly because I did not care about the
money. I cared about trading well. I cared what Rich thought of
my trading, but I didn’t care about the money that was ﬂowing in
and out of my account each day.
Money is a tool; it is necessary for certain things. It is very useful, but it is a very poor objective in and of itself. Being wealthy
does not make you happy. I know. I have tried it several times.

242 • Way of the Turtle

I have also tried the opposite. At one point, when I was 33, the
stock in a company I founded and took public but no longer
worked at dropped suddenly. That meant that my liquid assets dried
up almost overnight. I had divorced recently and did not have many
other assets besides stock in that company; I had given my house
to my wife in the divorce.
I was no longer part of the company I had founded and did not
have any faith in the management. Therefore, I no longer viewed
myself as an investor but instead as a trader. In my role as a trader,
the price had been going down, and so I had been selling. Unfortunately, the market was very thin and the market makers were not
the best. Further, I had sufﬁcient shares to drive the price down to
close to zero on just my own selling if I was not careful. Therefore,
I had been selling 10,000 to 20,000 shares every few weeks for several months before the rapid decline in price.
I was working on a start-up airline at the time and had been
using the money from the sales of the stock for costs associated with
the start-up and my living expenses. That was no longer an option.
I went from having several years’ expenses covered to less than two
months almost overnight, meaning that I needed to ﬁnd a way to
make money; I needed to get a job. I had not worked for anyone
else since the Turtle days. In fact, with the exception of Richard
Dennis and my ﬁrst programming job in high school and college,
I never had worked for someone else. I spent several months looking for a job that was interesting and landed a consulting job working on a marketing project for a small Internet start-up. I was
literally out of cash at that point and barely managed to ﬁnd
enough money to pay for the hotel I stayed in until I cashed my
ﬁrst paycheck.

When All Is Said and Done • 243

Some might have considered this a terrible experience, but I
didn’t. The things I really enjoyed in life were not affected much
by my change in condition. I liked to go out with friends to lunch
and dinner, have discussions with interesting people, talk about
doing something challenging with a group of people, and the like.
None of those activities required much money, and I was more able
to do them in my new job in Silicon Valley than I had been able
to do in Lake Tahoe or Reno, where I had lived previously. I was
actually having more fun and enjoying my life as much as or more
than I had when I had had millions because I was able to do something that I really loved.
That experience also gave me greater empathy for those who do
not have money or are in poor circumstances. I now know what it
is like not to be able to eat when hungry and to live from paycheck
to paycheck.
I also learned a tremendous amount about start-ups and entrepreneurial management during that period. I had not realized it,
but not having worked for anyone else had been a signiﬁcant disadvantage. It is certainly more difﬁcult to manage people well
when you don’t know what it is like to be managed yourself. As a
consultant, I was at the bottom of the organization chart. I had
no direct reports or even the silly little perks that employees get,
which somehow seemed important since they were not available
to me. I also had no real power. I could effect change only
through inﬂuence. That was a disadvantage, but it forced me to
hone my skills of persuasion, and I was able to effect some
changes when people believed in my perspective. Since it was a
bigger challenge to effect change with no real power, I enjoyed
it immensely.

244 • Way of the Turtle

I believe that the lessons and skills I learned in that period have
been invaluable and will continue to help me in my future efforts.
I have experienced things that many people fear; I feared those
things myself. In every case the reality of what I feared was never
as bad as the fear itself.
I say this to encourage you to chase your dreams, even those you
may have given up on. If you fail in the attempt, learn from that
failure and try again. If you persist, you will move closer and closer
to your goal, or you may ﬁnd that another goal becomes even more
important.
Go ahead and take that trade. It may not turn out the way you
expected or hoped, but then again, it may turn out even better. You
will never know if you don’t try.

bonus chapter
ORIGINAL TURTLE
TRADING RULES
I always say that you could publish my trading rules in the newspaper
and no one would follow them. The key is consistency and discipline.
Almost anybody can make up a list of rules that are 80% as good as
what we taught our people. What they couldn’t do is give them the
conﬁdence to stick to those rules even when things are going bad.
—Richard Dennis, quoted in Market Wizards by Jack D. Schwager

A Complete Trading System
ost successful traders use a mechanical trading system. This
is not a coincidence. A good mechanical trading system automates the entire process of trading. The system provides answers
for each of the decisions a trader must make while trading. It makes
it easier for a trader to trade consistently because there is a set of
rules that speciﬁcally deﬁne exactly what should be done. The
mechanics of trading are not left up to the judgment of the trader.
If you know that your system makes money over the long run, it
is easier to take the signals and trade according to the system dur-

M

• 245 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

246 • Way of the Turtle

ing periods of losses. If you are relying on your own judgment when
you are trading, you may ﬁnd that you are fearful when you should
be bold and courageous when you should be cautious.
If you have a mechanical trading system that works and follow it
consistently, your trading will be consistent despite the inner emotional struggles that may result from a long series of losses or a large
proﬁt. The conﬁdence, consistency, and discipline afforded by a
thoroughly tested mechanical system are the key to many of the
most proﬁtable traders’ success.
The Turtle Trading System was a complete trading system. Its
rules covered every aspect of trading and left no decisions to the
subjective whims of the trader. It had every component of a complete trading system that covers each of the decisions required for
successful trading:
• Markets: What to buy or sell
• Position Sizing: How much to buy or sell
• Entries: When to buy or sell
• Stops: When to get out of a losing position
• Exits: When to get out of a winning position
• Tactics: How to buy or sell

Markets: What to Buy or Sell
The ﬁrst decision is what to buy and sell or, essentially, what markets to trade. If you trade too few markets, you greatly reduce your
chances of getting aboard a trend. At the same time, you do not
want to trade markets that have too low a trading volume or that do
not trend well.

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 247

Position Sizing: How Much to Buy or Sell
The decision about how much to buy or sell is fundamental, yet it
often is glossed over or handled improperly by most traders.
How much to buy or sell affects both diversiﬁcation and money
management. Diversiﬁcation is an attempt to spread risk across
many instruments and increase the opportunity for proﬁt by
increasing the opportunities for catching successful trades. Proper
diversiﬁcation requires making similar, if not identical, bets on
many different instruments. Money management is really about
controlling risk by not betting so much that you run out of money
before the good trends come.
How much to buy or sell is the single most important aspect of
trading. Most beginning traders risk far too much on each trade and
greatly increase their chances of going bust even if they have an
otherwise valid trading style.

Entries: When to Buy or Sell
The decision about when to buy or sell often is called the entry
decision. Automated systems generate entry signals that deﬁne the
exact price and market conditions that tell you when to enter the
market whether by buying or by selling.

Stops: When to Get Out of a Losing Position
Traders who do not cut their losses will not be successful in the
long term. The most important thing about cutting your losses is
to predeﬁne the point at which you will get out before you enter a
position.

248 • Way of the Turtle

Exits: When to Get Out of a Winning Position
Many “trading systems” that are sold as complete systems do not
speciﬁcally address the exit of winning positions. However, the
question of when to get out of a winning position is crucial to the
proﬁtability of the system. Any trading system that does not address
the exit of winning positions is not a complete system.

Tactics: How to Buy or Sell
Once a signal has been generated, tactical considerations regarding the mechanics of execution become important. This is especially true for larger accounts, where the entry into and exit of
positions can result in signiﬁcant adverse price movement, or market impact.
Using a mechanical system is the best way to make money consistently in trading. If you know that your system makes money over
the long run, it is easier to take the signals and follow the system
during periods of losses. It is worth repeating that if you rely on your
own judgment, during trading you may ﬁnd that you are fearful
when you should be courageous or courageous when you should
be fearful.
If you have a proﬁtable mechanical trading system and follow it
religiously, your trading will be proﬁtable and the system will help
you survive the emotional struggles that inevitably result from a
long series of losses or large proﬁts.
The trading system that was used by the Turtles was a complete
trading system, and that was a major factor in our success. Our system made it easier to trade consistently and successfully because it
did not leave important decisions to the discretion of the trader.

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 249

Markets: What the Turtles Traded
The Turtles were futures traders, at the time more popularly called
commodities traders. We traded futures contracts on the most popular U.S. commodities exchanges. Since we were trading millions
of dollars, we could not trade markets that had only a few hundred
contracts per day because that would mean that the orders we generated would move the market so much that it would be too difﬁcult to enter and exit positions without taking large losses. The
Turtles traded only the most liquid markets. In fact, market liquidity was the primary criterion Richard Dennis used when determining which markets we were to trade.
In general, the Turtles traded all liquid U.S. markets except the
grains and the meats. Since Richard Dennis already was trading
the full legal position limits for his own account, he could not permit us to trade grains for him without exceeding the exchange’s
position limits. We did not trade the meats because of a corruption
problem with the ﬂoor traders in the meat pits. Some years after
the Turtles disbanded, the FBI conducted a major sting operation
in the Chicago meat pits and indicted many traders for price
manipulation and other forms of corruption.
The following is a list of the futures markets traded by the Turtles:

Chicago Board of Trade
• 30-year U.S. Treasury bond
• 10-year U.S. Treasury note

New York Coffee Cocoa and Sugar Exchange
• Coffee

250 • Way of the Turtle

• Cocoa
• Sugar
• Cotton

Chicago Mercantile Exchange
• Swiss franc
• Deutschmark
• British pound
• French franc
• Japanese yen
• Canadian dollar
• S&P 500 stock index
• Eurodollar
• 90-day U.S. Treasury bill

Comex
• Gold
• Silver
• Copper

New York Mercantile Exchange
• Crude oil
• Heating oil
• Unleaded gas
The Turtles were given the discretion of not trading any of the
commodities on the list. However, if a trader chose not to trade a

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 251

particular market, he was not to trade that market at all. We were
not supposed to trade markets inconsistently.

Position Sizing
The Turtles used a position sizing algorithm that was very advanced
for its day because it normalized the dollar volatility of a position
by adjusting the position size on the basis of the dollar volatility of
the market. That meant that a speciﬁc position would tend to move
up or down on a speciﬁc day about the same amount in dollar
terms (compared with positions in other markets) regardless of the
underlying volatility of that particular market.
This was done because positions in markets that moved up and down
a large amount per contract would have an offsetting smaller number
of contracts than would positions in markets that had lower volatility.
This volatility normalization was very important because it meant
that different trades in different markets tended to have the same
chance for a particular dollar loss or a particular dollar gain. This
increased the effectiveness of the diversiﬁcation of trading across many
markets.
Even if the volatility of a speciﬁc market was lower, any signiﬁcant trend would result in a sizable win because the Turtles would
have held more contracts of that lower volatility commodity.

Volatility: The Meaning of N
The Turtles used a concept that Richard Dennis and Bill Eckhardt
called N to represent the underlying volatility of a particular market. N is simply the 20-day exponential moving average of the true
range, which is now more commonly known as the Average True

252 • Way of the Turtle

Range (or ATR). Conceptually, N represents the average range in
price movement that a particular market experiences in a single day,
accounting for opening gaps. N was measured in the same points as
the underlying contract.
To compute the daily true range, one uses the following relationship:
True range  maximum(H – L, H – PDC, PDC – L)
where
H  current high
L  current low
PDC  previous day’s close
To compute N, one can use the following formula:
N

(19  PDN  TR)
20

where
PDN  previous day’s N
TR  current day’s true range
Since this formula requires a previous day’s N value, you must
start with a 20-day simple average of the true range for the initial
calculation.

Dollar Volatility Adjustment
The ﬁrst step in determining the position size was to determine the
dollar volatility represented by the underlying market’s price volatility (deﬁned by its N).
This sounds more complicated than it is. It is determined by
using the following simple formula:

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 253

Dollar volatility  N  dollars per point

Volatility-Adjusted Position Units
The Turtles built positions in pieces that we called units. Units
were sized so that 1N represented 1 percent of the account equity.
Thus, the unit size for a speciﬁc market or commodity can be
calculated by using the following formula:
Unit size 

1% of account
market dollar volatility

Unit size =

1% of account
N  dollars per point

or

Following are some examples.

Heating Oil HO03H
Consider the following prices, true range, and N values for March
2003 heating oil:
Date

High

Low

Close

True Range

N

11/1/2002

0.7220

0.7124

0.7124

0.0096

0.0134

11/4/2002

0.7170

0.7073

0.7073

0.0097

0.0132

11/5/2002

0.7099

0.6923

0.6923

0.0176

0.0134

11/6/2002

0.6930

0.6800

0.6838

0.0130

0.0134

11/7/2002

0.6960

0.6736

0.6736

0.0224

0.0139

11/8/2002

0.6820

0.6706

0.6706

0.0114

0.0137

11/11/2002

0.6820

0.6710

0.6710

0.0114

0.0136

(continued on next page)

254 • Way of the Turtle

Date

High

Low

Close

True Range

N

11/12/2002

0.6795

0.6720

0.6744

0.0085

0.0134

11/13/2002

0.6760

0.6550

0.6616

0.0210

0.0138

11/14/2002

0.6650

0.6585

0.6627

0.0065

0.0134

11/15/2002

0.6701

0.6620

0.6701

0.0081

0.0131

11/18/2002

0.6965

0.6750

0.6965

0.0264

0.0138

11/19/2002

0.7065

0.6944

0.6944

0.0121

0.0137

11/20/2002

0.7115

0.6944

0.7087

0.0171

0.0139

11/21/2002

0.7168

0.7100

0.7124

0.0081

0.0136

11/22/2002

0.7265

0.7120

0.7265

0.0145

0.0136

11/25/2002

0.7265

0.7098

0.7098

0.0167

0.0138

11/26/2002

0.7184

0.7110

0.7184

0.0086

0.0135

11/27/2002

0.7280

0.7200

0.7228

0.0096

0.0133

12/2/2002

0.7375

0.7227

0.7359

0.0148

0.0134

12/3/2002

0.7447

0.7310

0.7389

0.0137

0.0134

12/4/2002

0.7420

0.7140

0.7162

0.0280

0.0141

The unit size for December 6, 2002, using the N value of 0.0141
from December 4, is as follows:
Heating oil:
N  0.0141
Account size  $1,000,000
Dollars per point  42,000 (42,000-gallon contracts with price
quoted in dollars)
Unit size 

0.01  $1,000,000
 16.88
0.0141  42,000

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 255

Since it is not possible to trade partial contracts, this would be
truncated to an even 16 contracts.
You might ask: “How often is it necessary to compute the values
for N and the unit size?” The Turtles were provided with a unit size
sheet on Monday of each week that listed N and the unit size in
contracts for each of the futures that we traded.

The Importance of Position Sizing
Diversiﬁcation is an attempt to spread risk across many instruments
and increase the opportunity for proﬁt by increasing the opportunities to catch successful trades. To diversify properly requires making similar if not identical bets on many different instruments.
The Turtle System used market volatility to measure the risk
involved in each market. We then used that risk measurement to
build positions in increments that represented a constant amount of
risk (or volatility). That enhanced the beneﬁts of diversiﬁcation and
increased the likelihood that winning trades would offset losing trades.
Note that this diversiﬁcation is much harder to achieve when
one is using insufﬁcient trading capital. Consider the above example if a $100,000 account had been used. The unit size would have
been a single contract, since 1.688 truncates to 1. For smaller
accounts, the granularity of the adjustment is too large, and this
greatly reduces the effectiveness of diversiﬁcation.

Units as a Measure of Risk
Since the Turtles used the unit as the base measure for position size
and since those units were adjusted for volatility risk, the unit was
a measure of the risk both of a position and of the entire portfolio
of positions.

256 • Way of the Turtle

The Turtles were given risk management rules that limited the
number of units that we could maintain at any speciﬁc time on four
different levels. In essence, those rules controlled the total risk that a
trader could carry, and those limits minimized losses during prolonged
losing periods as well as during extraordinary price movements.
An example of an extraordinary price movement was the day
after the October 1987 stock market crash. The U.S. Federal
Reserve lowered interest rates by several percentage points
overnight to boost the conﬁdence of the stock market and the country. The Turtles were loaded short in interest-rate futures: eurodollars, T-bills, and bonds. The losses the next day were enormous. In
most cases, 40 to 60 percent of account equity was lost in a single
day. However, those losses would have been correspondingly higher
without the maximum position limits.
The limits were as follows:
Level

Type

Maximum Units

1

Single market

4

2

Closely correlated markets

6

3

Loosely correlated markets

10

4

Single direction, long or short

12

Single markets: A maximum of 4 units per market.
Closely correlated markets: For markets that were closely correlated, there could be a maximum of 6 units in one particular
direction (i.e., 6 long units or 6 short units). Closely correlated market groups include heating oil and crude oil; gold and silver; the
currencies as a group; interest rate futures such as T-bills and
eurodollars; and so on.

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 257

Loosely correlated markets: For loosely correlated markets,
there could be a maximum of 10 units in one particular direction.
Loosely correlated markets included gold and copper; silver and
copper; and many grain combinations that the Turtles did not trade
because of position limits.
Single direction: The maximum number of total units in one
direction long or short was 12 units. Thus, one theoretically could
have had 12 units long and 12 units short at the same time.
The Turtles used the term loaded to represent having the maximum permitted number of units for a particular risk level. Thus,
loaded in yen meant having the maximum 4 units of Japanese
yen contracts, completely loaded meant having 12 units, and so
forth.

Adjusting Trading Size
There are times when the market does not trend for many months.
During those times, it is possible to lose a signiﬁcant percentage of
the equity of the account.
After large winning trades close out, one may want to increase
the size of the equity used to compute position size.
The Turtles did not trade normal accounts with a running balance based on the initial equity. We were given notional accounts
with a starting equity of zero and a speciﬁc account size. For example, many Turtles received a notional account size of $1 million
when we started trading in February 1983. That account size was
adjusted each year at the beginning of the year. It was adjusted up
or down depending on the success of the trader as measured subjectively by Rich. The increase or decrease typically represented

258 • Way of the Turtle

something close to the addition of the gains or losses that were
made in the account during the preceding year.
The Turtles were instructed to decrease the size of the notional
account by 20 percent each time we went down 10 percent of the
original account. Thus, if a Turtle trading a $1,000,000 account
ever was down 10 percent, or $100,000, we would begin trading as
if we had an $800,000 account until we reached the yearly starting
equity. If we lost another 10 percent (10 percent of $800,000 or
$80,000, for a total loss of $180,000), we would reduce the account
size by another 20 percent for a notional account size of $640,000.
There are other, perhaps better strategies for reducing or increasing equity as the account goes up or down. These are the rules that
the Turtles used.

Entries
The typical trader thinks mostly in terms of the entry signals when
she is thinking about a particular trading system. Traders believe
that the entry is the most important aspect of any trading system.
They might be surprised to ﬁnd that the Turtles used a very simple entry system based on the channel breakout systems taught by
Richard Donchian.
The Turtles were given rules for two different but related breakout systems we called System 1 and System 2. We were given full
discretion to allocate as much of our equity to either system as we
wanted. Some of us chose to trade all our equity using System 2,
some chose to use a 50 percent System 1 and 50 percent System
2 split, and others chose different mixes. The two systems were as
follows:

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 259

System 1: a shorter-term system based on a 20-day breakout
System 2: a simpler long-term system based on a 55-day breakout.

Breakouts
A breakout is deﬁned as the price exceeding the high or low of a
particular number of days. Thus, a 20-day breakout would be
deﬁned as exceeding the high or low of the preceding 20 days.
Turtles always traded at the breakout when it was exceeded during the day and did not wait until the daily close or the open of the
following day. In the case of opening gaps, the Turtles would enter
positions on the open if a market opened through the price of the
breakout.

System 1 Entry
Turtles entered positions when the price exceeded by a single tick
the high or low of the preceding 20 days. If the price exceeded the
20-day high, the Turtles would buy 1 unit to initiate a long position
in the corresponding commodity. If the price dropped one tick
below the low of the last 20 days, the Turtles would sell 1 unit to
initiate a short position.
System 1 breakout entry signals would be ignored if the last
breakout would have resulted in a winning trade. Note: For the purposes of this test, the last breakout was considered the last breakout
in the particular commodity regardless of whether that particular
breakout was actually taken or was skipped because of this rule.
This breakout would be considered a losing breakout if the price
subsequent to the date of the breakout moved 2N against the position before a proﬁtable 10-day exit occurred.

260 • Way of the Turtle

The direction of the last breakout was irrelevant to this rule.
Thus, a losing long breakout or a losing short breakout would
enable the subsequent new breakout to be taken as a valid entry
regardless of its direction (long or short).
However, if a System 1 entry breakout was skipped because the
previous trade had been a winner, an entry would be made at the
55-day breakout to avoid missing major moves. This 55-day breakout was considered the failsafe breakout point.
At any given point, if a trader was out of the market, there would
always be some price that would trigger a short entry and another
different and higher price that would trigger a long entry. If the last
breakout was a loser, the entry signal would be closer to the current price (i.e., the 20-day breakout) than it would be if it had been
a winner, in which case the entry signal probably would be farther
away, at the 55 day breakout.

System 2 Entry
We entered when the price exceeded by a single tick the high or
low of the preceding 55 days. If the price exceeded the 55-day high,
the Turtles would buy 1 unit to initiate a long position in the corresponding commodity. If the price dropped one tick below the low
of the last 55 days, the Turtles would sell 1 unit to initiate a short
position.
All breakouts for System 2 would be taken whether or not the
previous breakout had been a winner.

Adding Units
Turtles entered single-unit long positions at the breakouts and
added to those positions at 1⁄2N intervals after their initial entry. This

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 261

⁄2N interval was based on the actual ﬁll price of the previous order.
Thus, if an initial breakout order slipped by 1⁄2N, the new order
would be 1 full N past the breakout to account for the 1⁄2N slippage,
plus the normal 1⁄2N unit add interval.
This would continue right up to the maximum permitted number of units. If the market moved quickly enough, it was possible
to add the maximum 4 units in a single day.
Here is an example.
1

Gold
N  2.50
55-day breakout  310
First unit added
Second unit
Third unit
Fourth unit

310.00
310.00  1⁄2 2.50, or 311.25
311.25  1⁄2 2.50, or 312.50
312.50  1⁄2 2.50, or 313.75

Crude Oil
N  1.20
55-day breakout  28.30
First unit added
Second unit
Third unit
Fourth unit

28.30
28.30  1⁄2 1.20, or 28.90
28.90  1⁄2 1.20, or 29.50
29.50  1⁄2 1.20, or 30.10

Consistency
The Turtles were told to be very consistent in taking entry signals because most of the proﬁts in a particular year might come

262 • Way of the Turtle

from only two or three large winning trades. If a signal was
skipped or missed, this could have a great effect on the returns
for the year.
The Turtles with the best trading records consistently applied
the entry rules. The Turtles with the worst records and all those
who were dropped from the program failed to enter positions consistently when the rules indicated.

Stops
There is an expression: “There are old traders and there are bold
traders, but there are no old bold traders.” Most traders who do not
use stops go broke. The Turtles always used stops.
For most people, it is far easier to cling to the hope that a losing
trade will turn around than it is to get out of a losing position and
admit that the trade did not work out.
Let me make one thing very clear: Getting out of a losing position
when the rules of a system dictate doing that is critical. Traders who
do not cut their losses will not be successful in the long term. Almost
all the examples of trading that got out of control and jeopardized
the health of the ﬁnancial institution, such as Barings and LongTerm Capital Management, involved trades that were allowed to
develop into large losses because they were not cut short when they
were small losses.
The most important thing about cutting your losses is to have
predeﬁned the point where you will get out before you enter a position. If the market moves to your price, you must get out, no exceptions, every single time. Wavering from this method eventually will
result in disaster.

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 263

Note: The reader may have noticed an inconsistency between
my comments here and those in Chapter 10, where I noted that
adding stops sometimes harms system performance and is not
always necessary. The systems outlined previously which work well
without stops do have an implicit stop because as the price moves
against the position there will come a point where the moving averages will cross and the losses will be limited. So in a sense, there is
a stop, it is just not one that is visible or known to the trader. For
most people, however, the psychological comfort of having a price
point where they will exit a losing trade is important. This is especially true of beginners. It can be psychologically destabilizing to
watch a position go against you without having a clear view of the
point where the pain will end.

Turtle Stops
Having stops did not mean that the Turtles always had actual stop
orders placed with the broker.
Since the Turtles carried such large positions, we did not want
to reveal our positions or our trading strategies by placing stop
orders with brokers. Instead, we were encouraged to have a particular price that when hit would cause us to exit our positions by
using either limit orders or market orders.
These stops were nonnegotiable exits. If a particular commodity traded at the stop price, the position was exited each time, every
time, without fail.

Stop Placement
The Turtles placed their stops on the basis of position risk. No trade
could incur more than 2 percent risk.

264 • Way of the Turtle

Since 1N of price movement represented 1 percent of account
equity, the maximum stop that would allow 2 percent risk would
be 2N of price movement. Turtles’ stops were set at 2N below the
entry for long positions and 2N above the entry for short positions.
To keep total position risk at a minimum, if additional units were
added, the stops for earlier units were raised by 1⁄2N. This generally
meant that all the stops for the entire position would be placed at
2N from the most recently added unit. However, in cases in which
later units were placed at larger spacing because of either fast markets causing skid or opening gaps, there would be differences in the
stops.
Here is an example.

Crude Oil
N = 1.20
55-day breakout = 28.30
Entry Price

Stop

28.30

25.90

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

26.50

Second unit

28.90

26.50

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.10

Second unit

28.90

27.10

Third unit

29.50

27.10

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

27.70

First unit

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 265

Third unit

29.50

27.70

Fourth unit

30.10

27.70

Here is a case in which a fourth unit was added at a higher price
because the market opened gapping up to 30.80:
Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

27.70

Third unit

29.50

27.70

Fourth unit

30.80

28.40

Alternative Stop Strategy: The Whipsaw
The Turtles were told about an alternative stop strategy that resulted
in better proﬁtability but was harder to execute because it incurred
many more losses, which resulted in a lower win/loss ratio. This
strategy was called the Whipsaw.
Instead of taking a 2 percent risk on each trade, the stops were
placed at 1⁄2N for 1⁄2 percent account risk. If a particular unit was
stopped out, the unit would be reentered if the market reached
the original entry price. A few Turtles used this method with good
success.
The Whipsaw also had the added beneﬁt of not requiring the
movement of stops for earlier units as new units were added, since
the total risk would never exceed 2 percent at the maximum 4
units.
For example, using Whipsaw stops, the crude oil entry stops
would be as follows:

266 • Way of the Turtle

Crude Oil
N  1.20
55-day breakout  28.30
Entry Price

Stop

28.30

27.70

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

28.30

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

28.30

Third unit

29.50

28.90

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

28.30

Third unit

29.50

28.90

Fourth unit

30.10

29.50

First unit

Beneﬁts of the Turtle System Stops
Since the Turtles’ stops were based on N, they adjusted for the
volatility of the markets. More volatile markets would have wider
stops, but they also would have fewer contracts per unit. This equalized the risk across all entries and resulted in better diversiﬁcation
and more robust risk management.

Exits
There is another old saying: “You can never go broke taking a
proﬁt.” The Turtles would not agree with this statement. Getting

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 267

out of winning positions too early, that is, “taking a proﬁt” too early,
is one of the most common mistakes in trading with trend-following systems.
Prices never go straight up; therefore, it is necessary to let the
prices go against you if you are going to ride a trend. Early in a
trend, this often can mean watching decent proﬁts of 10 to 30 percent fade to a small loss. In the middle of a trend, it may mean
watching a proﬁt of 80 to 100 percent drop by 30 to 40 percent.
The temptation to lighten the position to “lock in proﬁts” can be
very great.
The Turtles knew that where you took a proﬁt could make the
difference between winning and losing.
The Turtle System enters on breakouts. Most breakouts do not
result in trends. This means that most of the trades that the Turtles made resulted in losses. If the winning trades did not earn
enough on average to offset those losses, the Turtles would have
lost money. Every proﬁtable trading system has a different optimal
exit point.
Consider the Turtle System: If you exit winning positions at a
1N proﬁt and exit losing positions at a 2N loss, you will need twice
as many winners to offset the losses from the losing trades.
There is a complex relationship among the components of a
trading system. This means that you cannot consider the proper
exit for a proﬁtable position without considering the entry, money
management, and other factors.
The proper exit for winning positions is one of the most important aspects of trading and the least appreciated. However, it can
make the difference between winning and losing.

268 • Way of the Turtle

Turtle Exits
The System 1 exit was a 10-day low for long positions and a 10-day
high for short positions. All the units in the position would be exited
if the price went against the position for a 10-day breakout.
The System 2 exit was a 20-day low for long positions and a 20day high for short positions. All the units in the position would be
exited if the price went against the position for a 20-day breakout.
As with entries, the Turtles typically did not place exit stop orders
but instead watched the price during the day and started to phone in
exit orders as soon as the price traded through the exit breakout price.

These Are Difﬁcult Exits
For most traders, the Turtle System exits were probably the single
most difﬁcult part of the Turtle System rules. Waiting for a 10- or
20-day new low often can mean watching 20 percent, 40 percent,
or even 100 percent of signiﬁcant proﬁts evaporate.
There is a very strong tendency to want to exit earlier. It requires
great discipline to watch your proﬁts evaporate so that you can hold
on to your positions for the really big move. The ability to maintain discipline and stick to the rules during large winning trades is
the hallmark of an experienced successful trader.

Tactics
The architect Mies van der Rohe, when speaking about restraint
in design, once said: “God is in the details.” This is also true of trading systems. There are some important details that can make a signiﬁcant difference in the proﬁtability of your trading when you are
using the Turtle trading rules.

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 269

Entering Orders
As was mentioned before, Richard Dennis and William Eckhardt
advised the Turtles not to use stops when placing orders. We were
advised to watch the market and enter orders when the price hit our
stop price. We also were told that in general it was better to place
limit orders than market orders. This is the case because limit orders
offer a chance for better ﬁlls and less slippage than do market orders.
Any market at all times has a bid and an ask. The bid is the price
at which buyers are willing to buy, and the ask is the price at which
sellers are willing to sell. If at any time the bid price becomes
higher than the ask price, trading takes place. A market order will
always ﬁll at the bid or ask when there is sufﬁcient volume, and
sometimes it will ﬁll at a worse price for larger orders.
Typically, there is a certain amount of relatively random price
movement that occurs, which is sometimes known as the bounce.
The idea behind using limit orders is to place your order at the
lower end of the bounce instead of simply placing a market order.
A limit order will not move the market if it is a small order, and it
almost always will move it less if it is a larger order.
It takes some skill to be able to determine the best price for a
limit order. However, with practice, you should be able to get better ﬁlls using limit orders placed near the market than you do with
market orders.

Fast Markets
At times the market moves very quickly through the order prices,
and if you place a limit order, it simply will not get ﬁlled. During
fast market conditions, a market can move thousands of dollars per
contract in just a few minutes.

270 • Way of the Turtle

During those times, the Turtles were advised not to panic and
to wait for the market to trade and stabilize before placing their
orders. Most beginning traders ﬁnd this hard to do. They panic and
place market orders. Invariably, they do this at the worst possible
time and frequently end up trading on the high or low of the day
at the worst possible price.
In a fast market, liquidity temporarily dries up. In the case of a
rising fast market, sellers stop selling and hold out for a higher
price, and they will not recommence selling until the price stops
moving up. In this scenario, the asks rise considerably and the
spread between the bid and the ask widens.
Buyers now are forced to pay much higher prices as sellers continue raising their asks, and the price eventually moves so far and
so fast that new sellers come into the market, causing the price to
stabilize and often to reverse quickly and collapse partway back.
Market orders placed into a fast market usually end up getting
ﬁlled at the highest price of the run-up, right at the point where
the market begins to stabilize as new sellers come in.
The Turtles waited until there was some indication of at least a
temporary price reversal before placing our orders, and this often
resulted in much better ﬁlls than would have been achieved with
a market order. If the market stabilized at a point that was past our
stop price, we would get out of the market, but we would do so
without panicking.

Simultaneous Entry Signals
Many days there was little market movement and little for us to do
besides monitor existing positions. We might go for days without
placing a single order. Other days would be moderately busy, with

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 271

signals occurring intermittently over the stretch of a few hours. In
that case, we would take the trades as they came until they reached
the position limits for those markets.
Then there were days when it seemed like everything was happening at once, and we would go from no positions to loaded in a
day or two. Often this frantic pace was intensiﬁed by multiple signals in correlated markets.
This was especially true when the markets gapped open through
the entry signals. You might have a gap opening entry signal in
crude oil, heating oil, and unleaded gas on the same day. With
futures contracts, it was also extremely common for many different
months of the same market to signal at the same time. In those
moments it was important to act efﬁciently and quickly while trying to keep from panicking and issuing market orders since that
invariably would have resulted in much worse trade ﬁlls.

Buy Strength, Sell Weakness
If the signals came all at once, we always bought the strongest markets and sold short the weakest markets in a group.
We also would enter only one unit in a single contract month
at the same time. For instance, instead of buying February, March,
and April heating oil at the same time, we would pick only the
contract month that was the strongest and that had sufﬁcient volume and liquidity.
This is very important. Within a correlated group, the best long
positions are the strongest markets (which almost always outperform the weaker markets in the same group). Conversely, the
biggest winning trades to the short side come from the weakest markets within a correlated group.

272 • Way of the Turtle

The Turtles used various measures to determine strength and
weakness. The simplest and most common way to do that was simply to look at the charts and ﬁgure out which one “looked” stronger
(or weaker) by visual examination.
Some Turtles would determine how many N the price had
advanced since the breakout and buy the market that had moved
the most in terms of N. Others would subtract the price three
months earlier from the current price and then divide by the current N to normalize across markets. The strongest markets had the
highest values; the weakest markets had the lowest.
Any of these approaches will work well. The important thing is
to have long positions in the strongest markets and short positions
in the weakest markets.

Rolling Over Expiring Contracts
When futures contracts expire, there are two major factors that
need to be considered before rolling over into a new contract.
First, there are many instances when the near months trend well
but the more distant contracts fail to display the same level of price
movement. Do not roll into a new contract unless its price action
would have resulted in an existing position.
Second, contracts should be rolled before the volume and
open interest in the expiring contract decline too much. How
much is too much depends on the unit size. As a general rule, the
Turtles rolled existing positions into the new contract month a
few weeks before expiration unless the (currently held) near
month was performing signiﬁcantly better than contract months
that were farther out.

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 273

Finally
That concludes the Complete Turtle Trading System rules. As you
probably are thinking, they are not very complicated.
However, knowing these rules is not enough to make you rich.
You have to be able to follow them.
Remember what Richard Dennis said: “I always say that you
could publish my trading rules in the newspaper and no one would
follow them. The key is consistency and discipline. Almost anybody
can make up a list of rules that are 80% as good as what we taught
our people. What they couldn’t do is give them the conﬁdence to
stick to those rules even when things are going bad.”
Perhaps the best evidence that this is true is the performance of
the Turtles: Many of them did not make money. This was the case
not because the rules did not work; it happened because they could
not and did not follow the rules.
The Turtle rules are very difﬁcult to follow because they depend
on capturing relatively infrequent large trends. As a result, many
months can pass between winning periods, at times even a year or
two. During those periods it is easy to come up with reasons to
doubt the system and to stop following the rules: What if the rules
don’t work anymore? What if the markets have changed? What if
there is something important missing from the rules? How can I be
really sure that this works?
One member of the ﬁrst Turtle class, who was ﬁred from the
program before the end of the ﬁrst year, suspected early on that
information had been withheld intentionally from the group and
eventually became convinced that there were hidden secrets
that Rich would not reveal. That trader could not face up to the

274 • Way of the Turtle

simple fact that his poor performance was due to his own doubts
and insecurities, which resulted in his inability to follow the rules.
Another problem is the tendency to want to change the rules.
Many of the Turtles, in an effort to reduce the risk of trading the
system, changed the rules in subtle ways that sometimes had the
opposite of the desired effect. Here is an example.
Sometimes a trader fails to enter positions as quickly as the rules
specify (1 unit every 1⁄2N). Although this may seem like a more conservative approach, the reality could be that for the type of entry
system the Turtles used, adding to positions slowly might increase
the chance that a retracement would hit the exit stops, resulting in
losses, whereas a faster approach might allow the position to
weather the retracement without the stops being hit. This subtle
change could have a major impact on the proﬁtability of the system during certain market conditions.
It is important to build the level of conﬁdence you will need to
follow a trading system’s rules. Whether it is the Turtle System,
something similar, or a completely different system, it is imperative
that you personally conduct research by using historical trading
data. It is not enough to hear from others that a system works; it is
not enough to read the summary results from research conducted
by others. You must do it yourself.
Get your hands dirty and get directly involved in the research. Dig
into the trades, look at the daily equity logs, and get very familiar with
the way the system trades and the extent and frequency of the losses.
It is much easier to weather an eight-month losing period if you
know that there have been many periods of equivalent length in the
last 20 years. It will be much easier to add to positions quickly if you
know that adding quickly is a key part of the proﬁtability of the system.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Online Sources
he following sources are available to anyone who wants to learn
more about trading and trading system development:

T

www.wayoftheturtle.com: my personal online blog and
discussion site.
www.tradingblox.com/forum: a trading forum that I moderate
and manage at my software company.
www.modustrading.com/turtle: a trading education site run by
my friend David Bromley, who offers courses for those who
want to learn about trading and system development. I
helped him develop part of the initial curriculum and keep
hearing good things about it from those who have taken his
course.

Suggested Reading
In the course of writing this book, I wanted to make sure that I had
a good sense of what had been written about trading and trading
system development, and so I tried to read or reread most of the

• 275 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

276 • Way of the Turtle

books written on trading over the last 10 or 15 years that were on
the recommendation lists of people I respected. I found the following books especially useful:
Conway, Mark R., and Aaron N. Behle. Professional Stock
Trading. Waltham, MA: Acme Trader, 2003.
Elder, Alexander. Trading for a Living: Psychology, Trading
Tactics, Money Management. New York: Wiley, 1993.
LeBeau, Charles, and David W. Lucas. Technical Traders
Guide to Computer Analysis of the Futures Market. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1992.
Tharp, Van K. Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Weissman, Richard L. Mechanical Trading Systems: Pairing
Trader Psychology with Technical Analysis. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 2004.

Trading War Stories
If you like reading about real traders, you will ﬁnd the following
books interesting:
Lefèvre, Edwin. Reminiscences of a Stock Operator. New York:
Wiley, 1994.
Schwager, Jack D. Market Wizards: Interviews with Top
Traders. New York: HarperCollins, 1993.
Schwager, Jack D. The New Market Wizards: Interviews with
Top Traders. New York: HarperCollins, 1993.

Bibliography • 277

Additional Readings
Baron, J., and J. C. Hershey. “Outcome Bias in Decision
Evaluation.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1988.
Bernstein, Peter L. Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of
Risk. New York: Wiley, 1996.
Black, Keith. Managing a Hedge Fund: A Complete Guide to
Trading, Business Strategies, Operations, and Regulations.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Crabel, Toby. Day Trading with Short Term Price Patterns and
Opening Range Breakout. Greenwood, SC: Traders Press,
1990.
Feynman, Richard. Surely You’re Joking Mr. Feynman! New
York, W. W. Norton & Company, 1997.
Gilovich, Thomas. How We Know What Isn’t So. New York:
Free Press, 1993.
Kaufman, Perry J. New Trading Systems and Methods. New
York: Wiley, 2005.
Keirsey, David, and Marilyn Bates. Please Understand Me:
Character and Temperament Types. Delmar, CA:
Prometheus Nemesis Book Company, 1984.
Kiev, Ari. Trading to Win: The Psychology of Mastering the
Market. New York: Wiley, 1998.
Pardo, Robert. Design, Testing, and Optimization of Trading
Systems. New York: Wiley, 1992.
Pllana, Sabi. “History of Monte Carlo Method. ” Available at
http://www.geocities.com/CollegePark/Quad/2435/
history.html.

278 • Way of the Turtle

Plous, Scott. The Psychology of Judgment and Decision
Making. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993.
Rabin, Matthew. “Inference by Believers in the Law of Small
Numbers. ” Economics Department, University of
California, Berkeley, Working Paper E00-282. Available at
http://www.repositories.cdlib.org/iber/econ/E00-282, 2000.
Roston, Eric. “Hedging Their Costs.” Time, 2005.
Stridsman, Thomas. Trading Systems That Work: Building and
Evaluating Effective Trading Systems. New York: McGrawHill, 2000.
Wilder, J. Welles. New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems.
Greensboro, NC: Trend Research, 1978.
Wright, Robert. The Moral Animal: The New Science of
Evolutionary Psychology. New York: Pantheon, 1994.

INDEX

Against the Gods (Peter Bernstein), 2
Aggregated derivative markets, 217–218
Amaranth, 103
Anchoring, 16, 20, 76–79
Arbitrage, 4, 25, 105, 158
Arndt, George, xxiii–xxiv
Arnold, Tim, xxiii
Assets, liquid, 3
ATR (see Average true range)
ATR Channel Breakout, 131, 136–137
Average maximum drawdown, 188
Average monthly return, 98
Average one-year trailing return, 98
Average true range (ATR), 33, 66–67 (See
also N factor)
Backtesting, 179–206
actual system performance vs.,
196–199
with computer simulation, 133
for long-term trendfollowing,
132–133, 135–136, 143–145,
147–149
market variable in, 135
money management algorithm in, 136
Monte Carlo simulation with, 199–205
overoptimization in, 133
pitfalls of, 152
predictive errors from (see Discrepancies
between testing and trading results)
R-cubed measure for, 188–189
regressed annual return measure for,
186–188
representativeness of samples in,
192–194

robust Sharpe ratio for, 189–192
robustness of existing measures of,
182–184
size of samples in, 194–195
start and stop dates used in, 184–186
statistical basis for, 180–182
test dates in, 136
with Trading Blox Builder, 143–144
Bandwagon effect, 16, 20
Behavioral ﬁnance, 13, 14
Bernstein, Peter, 2
Best ﬁt line, 186
Beyond Greed and Fear (Hersh Shefrin),
13
Biases (see Psychological biases in trading)
Blame, 61–62
Blowups, 116
Bluffs, 157
Bollinger bands, 138
Bollinger Breakout, 131, 137–138
Branscomb, Chuck, 59
Breakouts, 124
as building blocks, 125
cause of, 82
Donchian channel, 68–70
psychological difﬁculty in trading, 69
trader effects in, 153–155
in Turtle Way, 38–39
Buffett, Warren, 1
Building blocks, 123–129
breakouts, 124, 125
deﬁned, 123
moving averages, 124–127
simple lookbacks, 125, 128
time-based exits, 125, 127–128

• 279 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

280 • Index

Building blocks (continued)
types of, 124–125
volatility channels, 125, 127, 128
Business risk, 2
CAGR% (see Compound annual growth
rate)
Career tracks, 238
Cars (contracts), 6
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), xix
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME),
5, 6
Cliffs, 174, 176
CME (see Chicago Mercantile Exchange)
Cognitive biases, 15–21
anchoring, 16, 20, 76–79
bandwagon effect, 16, 20
disposition effect, 15, 19, 78–79
edges from differences in, 75
law of small numbers, 16, 20–21
loss aversion, 15, 16
outcome bias, 15, 19–20
recency bias, 16, 20, 77–78
sunk costs, 15, 16–19
Collective perception, 8
Commodities Perspective, 41
Commodities trading, 249
Complex systems, 195
Compound annual growth rate
(CAGR%), 92, 97–98
RAR% vs., 186–187, 190–192
robustness of, 184–186
Consistency, 230–231
in following rules, 38
as rule for Turtles, 39
in taking entry signals, 261–262
in Turtle Trading System, 273–274
Contract speciﬁcations, 5–6
Contracts, 2, 6, 113 (See also Futures
contracts)
Countertrend trading, 23, 26
Cumulative probability curve, 54
Curve ﬁtting, 153, 172–177
Dalai Lama, 239
Day trading, 24–25
Decision making, 13, 14
Degree of roughness, 179
Deluttri, Dale, xxi

Dennis, Richard (Rich), xvii, xix–xxvi
classes taught by, 30–31, 33, 35, 37
and coffee trading, 214–215
on consistency and discipline, 273
drawdown views of, 91
on entries, 269
evaluation of Turtle class by, 44–45
and initial trades of Turtle class, 42–43
N factor used by, 117–119
personality of, 29
principles taught by, 223–224
“secrets” by, xv, 61, 224, 273
as teacher, 231
and trades made by Turtles, 86
trading by, 249
on trading rules, 245
Discipline, 273–274
Discrepancies between testing and trading results, 151–177
from optimization paradox, 163–172
from overﬁtting or curve ﬁtting,
172–177
from random effects, 158–162
sources of, 152–153
from trader effects, 153–158
Discretionary trading, 132–133, 224–229
Disposition effect, 15, 19, 78–79
Diversiﬁcation, 247
across markets, 213–219
in robust trading, 210
of systems, 219–221
Dollar volatility adjustment, 252–253
Donchian, Richard, 38, 258
Donchian channel breakout, 68–70
Donchian channels, 38
Donchian Trend system, 131, 139–140
deﬁned, 131
E-ratio for, 68–70
measures of return for, 98, 99
results of aggressive trading with,
111, 112
stops with, 144–145
Donchian Trend with Time Exit, 131,
140, 144–145
Douglas, Mark, 232
Drawdowns, 87
deﬁned, 23
longest, 97
maximum, 97, 111, 112

Index • 281

measures of risk/reward with, 87–91
tolerance for, 116
in trend following, 23
Dual Moving Average, 131, 141–142,
144–145
Eckhardt, William (Bill), xvii, xx–xxv
classes taught by, 30–31, 33, 35, 37
on entries, 269
evaluation of Turtle class by, 44
N factor used by, 117–119
on robust estimators, 183–184
and trades made by Turtles, 86
Edge ratio (E-ratio), 65–70
Edges, 63–73
deﬁned, 34, 63
elements of, 64–65
E-ratio, 65–70
exit edge, 71, 73
in gambling, 34–35, 63
as points of price instability, 82–84
random effects with, 158–159
reason for existence of, 75
of support and resistance, 75–82
in trading, 63–64
for trend followers, 81
trend portfolio ﬁlter edge, 69, 71,
72
in Turtle Way, 34
Ego, 224–229
Electronic exchanges, 9–10
Electronic markets, 9, 10
Emotional strength, 44
Emotions in trading (see Psychological
biases in trading)
Entries:
as edges, 64
simultaneous signals for, 270–271
strategies for, 64
tactics for, 269
in Turtle Classes, 33–35
in Turtle Trading System, 258–262
Equity curve scrambling, 201, 203
Exchanges, 6, 9
Exit threshold, 168, 169
Exits:
edges for, 64, 71, 73
strategies for, 64
time-based, 125, 127, 128

from trend-following systems, 39
in Turtle Trading System, 266–268
Expectations:
for reward, 106
taught in Turtle Classes, 35–37
unrealistic, 114, 115
Experts, myth of, 134
Exponential moving averages, 126–127
Failure:
blame for, 61–62
factors leading to, 114
and intelligence, xxv
learning from, 239–240
and making of money, 48
as part of trading, 49
Fast market conditions, 269–270
Fat tails, 56
Feynman, Richard, 200–201
Foreign markets, 213
Forward contracts, 2
Frost, Robert, 235
Fundamentals-driven markets, 217
Futures contracts:
contract speciﬁcations of, 5–6
criteria deﬁning, 5–6
in electronic markets, 10
hedging with, 2–4
interest-rate, 120
rolling over, 272
and trading pits, 9
Gaming theory and strategy, xxv
edges in, 34–35, 63
expectation in, 36
money management in, 109
in Turtle Classes, 31
Geometric average return, 97 (See also
Compound annual growth rate)
Going short, 4
Harvard Investment Service, xxiii–xxiii
Hedgers, goal of, 6
Hedging, 2–4
Herd effect, 20
Histograms, 55–60
Historical results, actual results vs. (see
Discrepancies between testing and
trading results)

282 • Index

Historical testing (see Backtesting)
Humility, 229–230
Illiquid markets, 216
Interest-rate futures, 120
Investors, 1–2
Irrational Exuberance (Robert Shiller),
13
Irrationality, 14 (See also Psychological
biases in trading)
Johnson, Mark, 136, 137
Kiev, Ari, 232
Law of small numbers, 16, 20–21
LeBeau, Chuck, 137–138
Lefèvre, Edwin, xxiii, 223
Limit orders, 34
Linear regression, 186
Liquid assets, 3
Liquidity risk, 3–4
Livermore, Jesse, xxiii, 223
Long positions:
exit threshold for, 168
and price movement, 9
Longest drawdown, 97
Long-Term Capital Management
(LTCM), 86, 102–103
Long-term trend-following systems,
131–149
ATR Channel Breakout, 136–137
Bollinger Breakout, 137–138
Donchian Trend, 139–140
Donchian Trend with Time Exit,
140
Dual Moving Average, 141–142
stops added to, 145–147
testing, 132–133, 135–136, 143–145,
147–149
Triple Moving Average, 142–143
types of, 131–132
Loss aversion, 15, 16
Losses:
approach to, 37
cutting, 262
with trend following, 96
Low returns, 87, 92
Lowenstein, Roger, 103

LTCM (see Long-Term Capital
Management)
Lucas, David, 137–138
Luck, 161, 162, 196
MAE (see Maximum adverse excursion)
Managed Accounts Reports, LLC, 104
Manhattan Project, 199–201
MAR ratio, 104–105
drawdown component of, 186–187
R-cubed vs., 191–192
robustness of, 184–185
Margin of error, 179
Margin requirements, 33
Market makers, 4
Market states, 25–27, 123
Market Wizards (Jack D. Schwager), 245
Markets, 4
adapting to conditions of, 211–213
in backtesting, 135
choice of, 213–216
comparing between, 59
complexity of, 201
diversiﬁcation across, 213
electronic, 10
emotional/mental bases of patterns in
(see Psychological biases in trading)
equating price movement across,
66–67
predicting, 48, 52
strongest vs. weakest, 271–272
and trader memory, 218–219
transfer of risk in, 2
trends in, 38
in Turtle Trading System, 249–250
types of, 216–218
volatility of, 25–27
Maximum adverse excursion (MAE),
65–67
Maximum drawdown, 97, 188
Maximum favorable excursion (MFE),
65–67
Measures of risk/reward, 85–107
average monthly return, 98
average one-year trailing return, 98
compound annual growth rate, 97–98
with drawdowns, 23, 87–91
longest drawdown, 97
with low returns, 92

Index • 283

MAR ratio, 104–105
maximum drawdown, 97
with price shocks, 92–95
R-cubed, 188–189
R-squared, 97
Sharpe ratio, 100–104
standard deviation of returns, 97
with system death, 94, 96, 105–106
and tolerance for pain/expectations for
reward, 106
in Turtle Way, 37
and types of risk, 86–87
uniﬁed, 98
Mechanical trading systems, 16,
245–246
MFE (see Maximum favorable excursion)
Mies van der Rohe, 268
Mindset for trading, 36, 47–62
being right vs. making money, 48–49,
61
and blame for failures, 61–62
and focus on future, 48–50, 53
and focus on past, 49–51
probabilities thinking in, 53–60
and taking responsibility for outcomes,
61–62
Minimum tick, 6
Money:
happiness and, 241–244
making, being right vs., 48–49, 61
Money management, 109–121
as art, 110
backtesting algorithm for, 136
deﬁned, 32, 109
estimating risk in, 120–121
level of risk in, 110–113
N factor in, 117–120
and risk of ruin, 113–116
in Turtle Classes, 32–33
uncertainty in, 116–117
in the Way of the Turtle, 117
Monte Carlo simulation, 199–205
Moving averages, 124
as building blocks, 125–127
dual, 131, 141–142
exponential, 126–127
simple, 126
triple, 132, 142–143
with volatility channels, 127, 128

N factor, 33, 117–120, 251–252
New Concepts in Technical Trading
Systems (J. Welles Wilder), 33
Normal distribution, 53–54
Observer effect, 153
Optimization, 163
and myth of the expert, 134
need for, 164–166
rolling optimization windows,
197–199
single-market, 195
Optimization paradox, 153, 164–172
and basis of predictive value, 168,
170–172
deception associated with, 172
moving average days parameter,
166–169
and need for optimization, 164–166
overﬁtting vs., 172–173
Or better orders, 34
Outcome bias, 15, 19–20
expectation and avoidance of, 35–36
in Turtle System, 48–49
Outcomes, taking responsibility for,
61–62
Overﬁtting, 172–177
deﬁned, 153, 163
optimization paradox vs., 172–173
and sample size, 176–177
Parameter scrambling, 196–197
Parameters, 163, 166–172
Perception:
edges from differences in, 75, 84
price movement and, 8
of support and resistance, 78
Performance measures, robustness of,
182–186
Pits, 9–10
Points of price instability, 82–84
Portfolio ﬁlters, 68, 69, 71, 72, 212
Position sizing, 118, 251–258
Position traders, 4 (See also Speculators)
Position trading, 24
Predictive value, 168, 170–172, 180
Price(s):
ﬂuctuation in, 6
as foundation for traders, 2

284 • Index

Price(s): (continued)
points of price instability, 82–84
spread of, 4
support and resistance for, 77–81
Price movement, 7–9
cause of, 8
good and bad parts of, 65–67
psychological factors in (see
Psychological biases in trading)
in trend following, 22
Price risk, 4
Price shocks, 87, 92–95
in illiquid markets, 216
volatility-based position sizing to avoid,
118
Probabilities thinking, 52–60
histograms, 55–60
normal distributions, 53–54
Probability density graph, 54
Probability mathematics, xxv, 31
Pseudo-experts, 134–135
Psychological biases in trading, 13–21
anchoring, 20
bandwagon effect, 20
as basis of Way of the Turtle, 14–15
disposition effect, 19
law of small numbers, 20–21
loss aversion, 16
outcome bias, 19–20
rational actor theory and, 14
recency bias, 20
sunk costs, 16–19
(See also Mindset for trading)
Psychological strength, 44, 232
Random effects, 152, 158–162
RAR% (see Regressed annual return)
Rational actor theory, 14
R-cubed, 188–192
Recency bias, 15, 20
and support/resistance levels, 77–78
in Turtle System, 49–50
Regressed annual return (RAR%),
186–188, 190–192
Regression effect, 160
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator
(Edwin Lefèvre), xxiii, 223
Resistance (see Support and resistance)
Responsibility, taking, 61–62

Results, historical vs. actual (see
Discrepancies between testing and
trading results)
Reversion to the mean, 160–161
Rewards:
expectations for, 106
measures of (see Measures of risk/
reward)
Risk(s), 2
with alternative investment funds,
101–102
business, 2
deﬁnitions of, 85
drawdowns, 87
estimating, 120–121
excessive, 110
expectation of, 37
hedging, 2–4
liquidity, 3–4
low returns, 87
managing, 39
measures of (see Measures of risk/
reward)
price, 4
price shocks, 87
probabilities of, 52
proper levels of, 110–113
rules for estimating, 120–121
system death, 87
trading, 3–4
transfer of, 2
types of, 86–87
units as measure of, 255–257
Risk of ruin, 113–116
in gambling, 31–32
managing (see Money management)
and money management, 113–116
taught in Turtle Classes, 31–32
Risk/reward ratio, 85
R-multiples, 59–60
Robust performance measures, 184–186
Robust Sharpe ratio, 189–192
Robust statistics, 183
Robust trading, 209–221
adaptation to market conditions in,
211–213
diversity in, 210
market diversiﬁcation for, 213–219
simplicity in, 210–211

Index • 285

system diversiﬁcation for, 219–221
Rolling optimization windows, 197–199
R-squared, 97
Runners, 5
Samples:
representativeness of, 192–194
size of, 176–177, 194–195
Scalpers, 4–5, 7–9
Scalping, 24
Schwager, Jack D., 245
Sharpe, William F., 100
Sharpe ratio, 100–104, 184–185
Shefrin, Hersh, 13
Shiller, Robert, 13
Short positions, 6, 7
exit threshold for, 168
and price movement, 8–9
Simple lookbacks, 125, 128
Simple moving averages, 126
Simplicity:
in robust trading, 210–211
as rule for Turtles, 39
Single-market optimization, 195
Size of trade, 109
Skew, 56
Small numbers, law of, 16, 20–21
Southwest Airlines, 2–3
Speculative markets, states of, 25–27
Speculator-driven markets, 217
Speculators, 4, 5, 7
Spread, 4, 24
Standard deviation of returns, 97
Start dates, 184–186
Statistics, 180–182
Steenbarer, Brett, 232
Stop dates, 184–186
Stops:
distance between entry and, 118
with long-term trend-following
systems, 144–147
in Turtle Trading System, 262–266
Whipsaw, 265–266
Styles of trading, 21–25
countertrend trading, 23
day trading, 24–25
matching personality to, 232
swing trading, 24
trend following, 22–23

Success:
emotional and psychological strength
for, 44
intelligence and, xxv
as making of money, 48
uniqueness for, 235
Success principles, 223–233
consistency, 230–231
humility, 229–230
letting go of ego, 224–229
and styles of trading, 232
Sunk costs effect, 15, 16–19
Support and resistance, 75–82
cognitive biases causing, 76–79
ﬁnding edge in, 79–82
Swing trading, 24, 26
System death, 87, 94, 96, 105–106
System Trader’s Club, 137
Systems 1 and 2, 38
Tactics, 269–272
Technical Traders Guide to Computer
Analysis of the Futures Markets
(Chuck LeBeau and David Lucas),
137–138
Test dates, 136
Tharp, Van, 33, 59, 232
Tick, 6
Time-based exits:
as building blocks, 127, 128
deﬁned, 125
Donchian Trend with, 131, 140
Trade scrambling, 201, 203
Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom
(Van Tharp), 33, 59
Trader effects, 144, 153–158
in breakouts, 153–155
deﬁned, 152
example of, 155–157
Traders, 1–2, 4–5
TradeStation, 213–214
Trading:
applying lessons in, xxvi
beliefs about, xxiv
primary goal of, 116
styles of, 21–25
Turtle rules for (see Turtle Trading
System)
Trading Blox, 67, 203

286 • Index

Trading Blox Builder, 143–144
Trading pits, 9–10
Trading systems, xxii, xxiii
comparing between, 59
discretionary trading vs., 224
diversiﬁcation of, 219–221
lucky, 196
mechanical, 16, 245–246
variable performance of, 207–209
Trend following, 22–23
appeal of, 105–106
basic idea of, 38
building blocks for (see Building
blocks)
long-term (see Long-term trend-following systems)
market states for, 25–26
markets for, 214–216
periods of losses with, 96
rules of, 38
source of edge for, 81
taught in Turtle Classes, 38–39
Trend portfolio ﬁlter, 68, 69, 71, 72
Trends, 22, 38
Triple Moving Average , 132, 142–145
The Turtle Classes, xxiv–xxvi, 29–45
expectation taught in, 35–37
ﬁrst, 30
foundations of methods taught in,
30–31
fundamental points of, 39
initial trades in, 40–45
money management taught in, 32–33
order entry and trading mechanics
taught in, 33–35
risk of ruin taught in, 31–32
trend following taught in, 38–39
Turtle Trading System, 245–275
consistency and discipline in, 273–274
decisions covered by, 246–248
entries in, 258–262
exits in, 266–268
markets in, 249–250
position sizing in, 251–258

stops in, 262–266
tactics in, 269–272
Turtle Way (see Way of the Turtle)
The Turtles, xv, xx–xxi, 47
Turtle-style trading systems (see Longterm trend-following systems)
Uncertainty:
in money management, 116–117
and probability thinking, 52–53
systematic errors under, 14
Uniﬁed measures of risk/reward, 98
Union League Club, 29–30
Unit size, 119–120
Units, 33, 118–119
adding, 260–262
as measure of risk, 255–257
volatility-adjusted, 253–255
Volatile markets, 25–27
Volatility:
dollar volatility adjustment, 252
measure of, 33
and N factor, 251–252
position units, volatility-adjusted,
253–255
Volatility channels, 125
ATR Channel Breakout system,
136–137
Bollinger bands, 138
as building blocks, 127, 128
Volatility-based position sizing, 118
Way of the Turtle, xxvi
dos and don’ts for, 60
losses viewed in, 37
mindset for, 36
money management in, 117
psychological basis of, 14–15
(See also Turtle Trading System)
When Genius Failed (Roger Lowenstein),
103
The Whipsaw, 265–266
Wilder, J. Welles, 33

